Hunt , Sully , and Hart , which seemed somewhat in the spirit of his new world. The effect of a house of this character on its owner is unmistakable. We think we are individual , separate , above houses and material objects generally ; but there is a subtle connection which makes them reflect us quite as much as we reflect them. They lend dignity , subtlety , force , each to the other , and what beauty , or lack of it , there is , is shot back and forth from one to the other as a shuttle in a loom , weaving , weaving. Cut the thread , separate a man from that which is rightfully his own , characteristic of him , and you have a peculiar figure , half success , half failure , much as a spider without its web , which will never be its whole self again until all its dignities and emoluments are restored. The sight of his new house going up made Cowperwood feel of more weight in the world , and the possession of his suddenly achieved connection with the city treasurer was as though a wide door had been thrown open to the Elysian fields of opportunity. He rode about the city those days behind a team of spirited bays , whose glossy hides and metaled harness bespoke the watchful care of hostler and coachman. Ellsworth was building an attractive stable in the little side street back of the houses , for the joint use of both families. He told Mrs. Cowperwood that he intended to buy her a victoria -- as the low , open , four-wheeled coach was then known -- as soon as they were well settled in their new home , and that they were to go out more. There was some talk about the value of entertaining -- that he would have to reach out socially for certain individuals who were not now known to him. Together with Anna , his sister , and his two brothers , Joseph and Edward , they could use the two houses jointly. There was no reason why Anna should not make a splendid match. Joe and Ed might marry well , since they were not destined to set the world on fire in commerce. At least it would not hurt them to try. `` Do n't you think you will like that ? '' he asked his wife , referring to his plans for entertaining. She smiled wanly. `` I suppose so , '' she said. Chapter XVI It was not long after the arrangement between Treasurer Stener and Cowperwood had been made that the machinery for the carrying out of that political-financial relationship was put in motion. The sum of two hundred and ten thousand dollars in six per cent. interest-bearing certificates , payable in ten years , was set over to the credit of Cowperwood & Co. on the books of the city