

The seeds of change--subtle, metaphysical--are rooted deeply. From the
first mention of the dance by Mrs. Cowperwood and Anna, Aileen had been
conscious of a desire toward a more effective presentation of herself
than as yet, for all her father's money, she had been able to achieve.
The company which she was to encounter, as she well knew, was to be so
much more impressive, distinguished than anything she had heretofore
known socially. Then, too, Cowperwood appeared as something more
definite in her mind than he had been before, and to save herself she
could not get him out of her consciousness.

A vision of him had come to her but an hour before as she was dressing.
In a way she had dressed for him. She was never forgetful of the times
he had looked at her in an interested way. He had commented on her hands
once. To-day he had said that she looked "stunning," and she had thought
how easy it would be to impress him to-night--to show him how truly
beautiful she was.

She had stood before her mirror between eight and nine--it was
nine-fifteen before she was really ready--and pondered over what she
should wear. There were two tall pier-glasses in her wardrobe--an unduly
large piece of furniture--and one in her closet door. She stood before
the latter, looking at her bare arms and shoulders, her shapely figure,
thinking of the fact that her left shoulder had a dimple, and that she
had selected garnet garters decorated with heart-shaped silver buckles.
The corset could not be made quite tight enough at first, and she chided
her maid, Kathleen Kelly. She studied how to arrange her hair, and there
was much ado about that before it was finally adjusted. She penciled her
eyebrows and plucked at the hair about her forehead to make it loose
and shadowy. She cut black court-plaster with her nail-shears and tried
different-sized pieces in different places. Finally, she found one size
and one place that suited her. She turned her head from side to side,
looking at the combined effect of her hair, her penciled brows, her
dimpled shoulder, and the black beauty-spot. If some one man could see
her as she was now, some time! Which man? That thought scurried back
like a frightened rat into its hole. She was, for all her strength,
afraid of the thought of the one--the very deadly--the man.

And then she came to the matter of a train-gown. Kathleen laid out five,
for Aileen had come into the joy and honor of these things recently, and
she had, with the permission of her mother and father, indulged
herself to the full. She studied a golden-yellow silk, with cream-lace
shoulder-straps, and some gussets of garnet beads in the train that
shimmered delightfully, but set it aside. She considered favorably a
black-and-white striped silk of odd gray effect, and, though she was
sorely tempted to wear it, finally let it go. There was a maroon dress,
with basque and overskirt over white silk; a rich cream-colored satin;
and then this black sequined gown, which she finally chose. She tried
on the cream-colored satin first, however, being in much doubt about it;
but her penciled eyes and beauty-spot did not seem to harmonize with
it. Then she put on the black silk with its glistening crimsoned-silver
sequins, and, lo, it touched her. She liked its coquettish drapery of
tulle and silver about the hips. The "overskirt," which was at that time
just coming into fashion, though avoided by the more conservative, had
been adopted by Aileen with enthusiasm. She thrilled a little at the
rustle of this black dress, and thrust her chin and nose forward to make
it set right. Then after having Kathleen tighten her corsets a little
more, she gathered the train over her arm by its train-band and looked
again. Something was wanting. Oh, yes, her neck! What to wear--red
coral? It did not look right. A string of pearls? That would not do
either. There was a necklace made of small cameos set in silver which
her mother had purchased, and another of diamonds which belonged to her
mother, but they were not right. Finally, her jet necklet, which she
did not value very highly, came into her mind, and, oh, how lovely it
looked! How soft and smooth and glistening her chin looked above it. She
caressed her neck affectionately, called for her black lace mantilla,
her long, black silk dolman lined with red, and she was ready.

The ball-room, as she entered, was lovely enough. The young men and
young women she saw there were interesting, and she was not wanting
for admirers. The most aggressive of these youths--the most
forceful--recognized in this maiden a fillip to life, a sting to
existence. She was as a honey-jar surrounded by too hungry flies.

But it occurred to her, as her dance-list was filling up, that there was
not much left for Mr. Cowperwood, if he should care to dance with her.

Cowperwood was meditating, as he received the last of the guests, on the
subtlety of this matter of the sex arrangement of life. Two sexes. He
was not at all sure that there was any law governing them. By comparison
now with Aileen Butler, his wife looked rather dull, quite too old, and
when he was ten years older she would look very much older.

"Oh, yes, Ellsworth had made quite an attractive arrangement out of
these two houses--better than we ever thought he could do." He was
talking to Henry Hale Sanderson, a young banker. "He had the advantage
of combining two into one, and I think he's done more with my little
one, considering the limitations of space, than he has with this big
one. Father's has the advantage of size. I tell the old gentleman he's
simply built a lean-to for me."

His father and a number of his cronies were over in the dining-room of
his grand home, glad to get away from the crowd. He would have to stay,
and, besides, he wanted to. Had he better dance with Aileen? His wife
cared little for dancing, but he would have to dance with her at least
once. There was Mrs. Seneca Davis smiling at him, and Aileen. By George,
how wonderful! What a girl!

"I suppose your dance-list is full to overflowing. Let me see." He was
standing before her and she was holding out the little blue-bordered,
gold-monogrammed booklet. An orchestra was playing in the music room.
The dance would begin shortly. There were delicately constructed,
gold-tinted chairs about the walls and behind palms.

He looked down into her eyes--those excited, life-loving, eager eyes.

"You're quite full up. Let me see. Nine, ten, eleven. Well, that will be
enough. I don't suppose I shall want to dance very much. It's nice to be
popular."

"I'm not sure about number three. I think that's a mistake. You might
have that if you wish."

She was falsifying.

"It doesn't matter so much about him, does it?"

His cheeks flushed a little as he said this.

"No."

Her own flamed.

"Well, I'll see where you are when it's called. You're darling. I'm
afraid of you." He shot a level, interpretive glance into her eyes, then
left. Aileen's bosom heaved. It was hard to breathe sometimes in this
warm air.

While he was dancing first with Mrs. Cowperwood and later with Mrs.
Seneca Davis, and still later with Mrs. Martyn Walker, Cowperwood had
occasion to look at Aileen often, and each time that he did so there
swept over him a sense of great vigor there, of beautiful if raw,
dynamic energy that to him was irresistible and especially so to-night.
She was so young. She was beautiful, this girl, and in spite of his
wife's repeated derogatory comments he felt that she was nearer to his
clear, aggressive, unblinking attitude than any one whom he had yet seen
in the form of woman. She was unsophisticated, in a way, that was plain,
and yet in another way it would take so little to make her understand so
much. Largeness was the sense he had of her--not physically, though she
was nearly as tall as himself--but emotionally. She seemed so intensely
alive. She passed close to him a number of times, her eyes wide and
smiling, her lips parted, her teeth agleam, and he felt a stirring
of sympathy and companionship for her which he had not previously
experienced. She was lovely, all of her--delightful.

"I'm wondering if that dance is open now," he said to her as he drew
near toward the beginning of the third set. She was seated with her
latest admirer in a far corner of the general living-room, a clear floor
now waxed to perfection. A few palms here and there made embrasured
parapets of green. "I hope you'll excuse me," he added, deferentially,
to her companion.

"Surely," the latter replied, rising.

"Yes, indeed," she replied. "And you'd better stay here with me. It's
going to begin soon. You won't mind?" she added, giving her companion a
radiant smile.

"Not at all. I've had a lovely waltz." He strolled off.

Cowperwood sat down. "That's young Ledoux, isn't it? I thought so. I saw
you dancing. You like it, don't you?"

"I'm crazy about it."

"Well, I can't say that myself. It's fascinating, though. Your partner
makes such a difference. Mrs. Cowperwood doesn't like it as much as I
do."

His mention of Lillian made Aileen think of her in a faintly derogative
way for a moment.

"I think you dance very well. I watched you, too." She questioned
afterwards whether she should have said this. It sounded most forward
now--almost brazen.

"Oh, did you?"

"Yes."

He was a little keyed up because of her--slightly cloudy in his
thoughts--because she was generating a problem in his life, or would
if he let her, and so his talk was a little tame. He was thinking of
something to say--some words which would bring them a little nearer
together. But for the moment he could not. Truth to tell, he wanted to
say a great deal.

"Well, that was nice of you," he added, after a moment. "What made you
do it?"

He turned with a mock air of inquiry. The music was beginning again. The
dancers were rising. He arose.

He had not intended to give this particular remark a serious turn; but,
now that she was so near him, he looked into her eyes steadily but with
a soft appeal and said, "Yes, why?"

They had come out from behind the palms. He had put his hand to her
waist. His right arm held her left extended arm to arm, palm to palm.
Her right hand was on his shoulder, and she was close to him, looking
into his eyes. As they began the gay undulations of the waltz she looked
away and then down without answering. Her movements were as light
and airy as those of a butterfly. He felt a sudden lightness himself,
communicated as by an invisible current. He wanted to match the
suppleness of her body with his own, and did. Her arms, the flash and
glint of the crimson sequins against the smooth, black silk of her
closely fitting dress, her neck, her glowing, radiant hair, all combined
to provoke a slight intellectual intoxication. She was so vigorously
young, so, to him, truly beautiful.

"But you didn't answer," he continued.

"Isn't this lovely music?"

He pressed her fingers.

She lifted shy eyes to him now, for, in spite of her gay, aggressive
force, she was afraid of him. His personality was obviously so
dominating. Now that he was so close to her, dancing, she conceived
of him as something quite wonderful, and yet she experienced a nervous
reaction--a momentary desire to run away.

"Very well, if you won't tell me," he smiled, mockingly.

He thought she wanted him to talk to her so, to tease her with
suggestions of this concealed feeling of his--this strong liking. He
wondered what could come of any such understanding as this, anyhow?

"Oh, I just wanted to see how you danced," she said, tamely, the force
of her original feeling having been weakened by a thought of what she
was doing. He noted the change and smiled. It was lovely to be dancing
with her. He had not thought mere dancing could hold such charm.

"You like me?" he said, suddenly, as the music drew to its close.

She thrilled from head to toe at the question. A piece of ice dropped
down her back could not have startled her more. It was apparently
tactless, and yet it was anything but tactless. She looked up quickly,
directly, but his strong eyes were too much for her.

"Why, yes," she answered, as the music stopped, trying to keep an even
tone to her voice. She was glad they were walking toward a chair.

"I like you so much," he said, "that I have been wondering if you really
like me." There was an appeal in his voice, soft and gentle. His manner
was almost sad.

"Why, yes," she replied, instantly, returning to her earlier mood toward
him. "You know I do."

"I need some one like you to like me," he continued, in the same vein.
"I need some one like you to talk to. I didn't think so before--but now
I do. You are beautiful--wonderful."

"We mustn't," she said. "I mustn't. I don't know what I'm doing."
She looked at a young man strolling toward her, and asked: "I have to
explain to him. He's the one I had this dance with."

Cowperwood understood. He walked away. He was quite warm and tense
now--almost nervous. It was quite clear to him that he had done or was
contemplating perhaps a very treacherous thing. Under the current code
of society he had no right to do it. It was against the rules, as
they were understood by everybody. Her father, for instance--his
father--every one in this particular walk of life. However, much
breaking of the rules under the surface of things there might be, the
rules were still there. As he had heard one young man remark once at
school, when some story had been told of a boy leading a girl astray and
to a disastrous end, "That isn't the way at all."

Still, now that he had said this, strong thoughts of her were in his
mind. And despite his involved social and financial position, which he
now recalled, it was interesting to him to see how deliberately and even
calculatingly--and worse, enthusiastically--he was pumping the bellows
that tended only to heighten the flames of his desire for this girl; to
feed a fire that might ultimately consume him--and how deliberately and
resourcefully!

Aileen toyed aimlessly with her fan as a black-haired, thin-faced young
law student talked to her, and seeing Norah in the distance she asked to
be allowed to run over to her.

"Oh, Aileen," called Norah, "I've been looking for you everywhere. Where
have you been?"

"Dancing, of course. Where do you suppose I've been? Didn't you see me
on the floor?"

"No, I didn't," complained Norah, as though it were most essential that
she should. "How late are you going to stay?"

"Until it's over, I suppose. I don't know."

"Owen says he's going at twelve."

"Well, that doesn't matter. Some one will take me home. Are you having a
good time?"

"Fine. Oh, let me tell you. I stepped on a lady's dress over there, last
dance. She was terribly angry. She gave me such a look."

"Well, never mind, honey. She won't hurt you. Where are you going now?"

Aileen always maintained a most guardian-like attitude toward her
sister.

"I want to find Callum. He has to dance with me next time. I know what
he's trying to do. He's trying to get away from me. But he won't."

Aileen smiled. Norah looked very sweet. And she was so bright. What
would she think of her if she knew? She turned back, and her fourth
partner sought her. She began talking gayly, for she felt that she had
to make a show of composure; but all the while there was ringing in her
ears that definite question of his, "You like me, don't you?" and her
later uncertain but not less truthful answer, "Yes, of course I do."




