

The situation which confronted Aileen was really a trying one. A girl of
less innate courage and determination would have weakened and yielded.
For in spite of her various social connections and acquaintances, the
people to whom Aileen could run in an emergency of the present kind were
not numerous. She could scarcely think of any one who would be likely
to take her in for any lengthy period, without question. There were a
number of young women of her own age, married and unmarried, who were
very friendly to her, but there were few with whom she was really
intimate. The only person who stood out in her mind, as having any real
possibility of refuge for a period, was a certain Mary Calligan, better
known as "Mamie" among her friends, who had attended school with Aileen
in former years and was now a teacher in one of the local schools.

The Calligan family consisted of Mrs. Katharine Calligan, the mother,
a dressmaker by profession and a widow--her husband, a house-mover by
trade, having been killed by a falling wall some ten years before--and
Mamie, her twenty-three-year-old daughter. They lived in a small
two-story brick house in Cherry Street, near Fifteenth. Mrs. Calligan
was not a very good dressmaker, not good enough, at least, for the
Butler family to patronize in their present exalted state. Aileen
went there occasionally for gingham house-dresses, underwear, pretty
dressing-gowns, and alterations on some of her more important clothing
which was made by a very superior modiste in Chestnut Street. She
visited the house largely because she had gone to school with Mamie
at St. Agatha's, when the outlook of the Calligan family was much more
promising. Mamie was earning forty dollars a month as the teacher of a
sixth-grade room in one of the nearby public schools, and Mrs. Calligan
averaged on the whole about two dollars a day--sometimes not so much.
The house they occupied was their own, free and clear, and the furniture
which it contained suggested the size of their joint income, which was
somewhere near eighty dollars a month.

Mamie Calligan was not good-looking, not nearly as good-looking as her
mother had been before her. Mrs. Calligan was still plump, bright, and
cheerful at fifty, with a fund of good humor. Mamie was somewhat duller
mentally and emotionally. She was serious-minded--made so, perhaps, as
much by circumstances as by anything else, for she was not at all vivid,
and had little sex magnetism. Yet she was kindly, honest, earnest,
a good Catholic, and possessed of that strangely excessive ingrowing
virtue which shuts so many people off from the world--a sense of duty.
To Mamie Calligan duty (a routine conformity to such theories and
precepts as she had heard and worked by since her childhood) was the
all-important thing, her principal source of comfort and relief; her
props in a queer and uncertain world being her duty to her Church; her
duty to her school; her duty to her mother; her duty to her friends,
etc. Her mother often wished for Mamie's sake that she was less dutiful
and more charming physically, so that the men would like her.

In spite of the fact that her mother was a dressmaker, Mamie's clothes
never looked smart or attractive--she would have felt out of keeping
with herself if they had. Her shoes were rather large, and ill-fitting;
her skirt hung in lifeless lines from her hips to her feet, of good
material but seemingly bad design. At that time the colored "jersey,"
so-called, was just coming into popular wear, and, being close-fitting,
looked well on those of good form. Alas for Mamie Calligan! The mode of
the time compelled her to wear one; but she had neither the arms nor the
chest development which made this garment admirable. Her hat, by choice,
was usually a pancake affair with a long, single feather, which somehow
never seemed to be in exactly the right position, either to her hair
or her face. At most times she looked a little weary; but she was not
physically weary so much as she was bored. Her life held so little of
real charm; and Aileen Butler was unquestionably the most significant
element of romance in it.

Mamie's mother's very pleasant social disposition, the fact that they
had a very cleanly, if poor little home, that she could entertain
them by playing on their piano, and that Mrs. Calligan took an adoring
interest in the work she did for her, made up the sum and substance
of the attraction of the Calligan home for Aileen. She went there
occasionally as a relief from other things, and because Mamie Calligan
had a compatible and very understanding interest in literature.
Curiously, the books Aileen liked she liked--Jane Eyre, Kenelm
Chillingly, Tricotrin, and A Bow of Orange Ribbon. Mamie occasionally
recommended to Aileen some latest effusion of this character; and
Aileen, finding her judgment good, was constrained to admire her.

In this crisis it was to the home of the Calligans that Aileen turned in
thought. If her father really was not nice to her, and she had to leave
home for a time, she could go to the Calligans. They would receive her
and say nothing. They were not sufficiently well known to the other
members of the Butler family to have the latter suspect that she had
gone there. She might readily disappear into the privacy of Cherry
Street and not be seen or heard of for weeks. It is an interesting
fact to contemplate that the Calligans, like the various members of the
Butler family, never suspected Aileen of the least tendency toward a
wayward existence. Hence her flight from her own family, if it ever
came, would be laid more to the door of a temperamental pettishness than
anything else.

On the other hand, in so far as the Butler family as a unit was
concerned, it needed Aileen more than she needed it. It needed the light
of her countenance to keep it appropriately cheerful, and if she went
away there would be a distinct gulf that would not soon be overcome.

Butler, senior, for instance, had seen his little daughter grow into
radiantly beautiful womanhood. He had seen her go to school and convent
and learn to play the piano--to him a great accomplishment. Also he had
seen her manner change and become very showy and her knowledge of life
broaden, apparently, and become to him, at least, impressive. Her smart,
dogmatic views about most things were, to him, at least, well worth
listening to. She knew more about books and art than Owen or Callum,
and her sense of social manners was perfect. When she came to the
table--breakfast, luncheon, or dinner--she was to him always a charming
object to see. He had produced Aileen--he congratulated himself. He had
furnished her the money to be so fine. He would continue to do so. No
second-rate upstart of a man should be allowed to ruin her life. He
proposed to take care of her always--to leave her so much money in a
legally involved way that a failure of a husband could not possibly
affect her. "You're the charming lady this evenin', I'm thinkin'," was
one of his pet remarks; and also, "My, but we're that fine!" At table
almost invariably she sat beside him and looked out for him. That was
what he wanted. He had put her there beside him at his meals years
before when she was a child.

Her mother, too, was inordinately fond of her, and Callum and Owen
appropriately brotherly. So Aileen had thus far at least paid back with
beauty and interest quite as much as she received, and all the family
felt it to be so. When she was away for a day or two the house seemed
glum--the meals less appetizing. When she returned, all were happy and
gay again.

Aileen understood this clearly enough in a way. Now, when it came to
thinking of leaving and shifting for herself, in order to avoid a trip
which she did not care to be forced into, her courage was based largely
on this keen sense of her own significance to the family. She thought
over what her father had said, and decided she must act at once. She
dressed for the street the next morning, after her father had gone, and
decided to step in at the Calligans' about noon, when Mamie would be at
home for luncheon. Then she would take up the matter casually. If
they had no objection, she would go there. She sometimes wondered why
Cowperwood did not suggest, in his great stress, that they leave for
some parts unknown; but she also felt that he must know best what he
could do. His increasing troubles depressed her.

Mrs. Calligan was alone when she arrived and was delighted to see her.
After exchanging the gossip of the day, and not knowing quite how to
proceed in connection with the errand which had brought her, she went to
the piano and played a melancholy air.

"Sure, it's lovely the way you play, Aileen," observed Mrs. Calligan who
was unduly sentimental herself. "I love to hear you. I wish you'd come
oftener to see us. You're so rarely here nowadays."

"Oh, I've been so busy, Mrs. Calligan," replied Aileen. "I've had so
much to do this fall, I just couldn't. They wanted me to go to Europe;
but I didn't care to. Oh, dear!" she sighed, and in her playing swept
off with a movement of sad, romantic significance. The door opened and
Mamie came in. Her commonplace face brightened at the sight of Aileen.

"Well, Aileen Butler!" she exclaimed. "Where did you come from? Where
have you been keeping yourself so long?"

Aileen rose to exchange kisses. "Oh, I've been very busy, Mamie. I've
just been telling your mother. How are you, anyway? How are you getting
along in your work?"

Mamie recounted at once some school difficulties which were puzzling
her--the growing size of classes and the amount of work expected. While
Mrs. Calligan was setting the table Mamie went to her room and Aileen
followed her.

As she stood before her mirror arranging her hair Aileen looked at her
meditatively.

"What's the matter with you, Aileen, to-day?" Mamie asked. "You look
so--" She stopped to give her a second glance.

"How do I look?" asked Aileen.

"Well, as if you were uncertain or troubled about something. I never saw
you look that way before. What's the matter?"

"Oh, nothing," replied Aileen. "I was just thinking." She went to one of
the windows which looked into the little yard, meditating on whether she
could endure living here for any length of time. The house was so small,
the furnishings so very simple.

"There is something the matter with you to-day, Aileen," observed Mamie,
coming over to her and looking in her face. "You're not like yourself at
all."

"I've got something on my mind," replied Aileen--"something that's
worrying me. I don't know just what to do--that's what's the matter."

"Well, whatever can it be?" commented Mamie. "I never saw you act this
way before. Can't you tell me? What is it?"

"No, I don't think I can--not now, anyhow." Aileen paused. "Do you
suppose your mother would object," she asked, suddenly, "if I came here
and stayed a little while? I want to get away from home for a time for a
certain reason."

"Why, Aileen Butler, how you talk!" exclaimed her friend. "Object! You
know she'd be delighted, and so would I. Oh, dear--can you come? But
what makes you want to leave home?"

"That's just what I can't tell you--not now, anyhow. Not you, so much,
but your mother. You know, I'm afraid of what she'd think," replied
Aileen. "But, you mustn't ask me yet, anyhow. I want to think. Oh, dear!
But I want to come, if you'll let me. Will you speak to your mother, or
shall I?"

"Why, I will," said Mamie, struck with wonder at this remarkable
development; "but it's silly to do it. I know what she'll say before I
tell her, and so do you. You can just bring your things and come. That's
all. She'd never say anything or ask anything, either, and you know
that--if you didn't want her to." Mamie was all agog and aglow at the
idea. She wanted the companionship of Aileen so much.

Aileen looked at her solemnly, and understood well enough why she was
so enthusiastic--both she and her mother. Both wanted her presence to
brighten their world. "But neither of you must tell anybody that I'm
here, do you hear? I don't want any one to know--particularly no one of
my family. I've a reason, and a good one, but I can't tell you what it
is--not now, anyhow. You'll promise not to tell any one."

"Oh, of course," replied Mamie eagerly. "But you're not going to run
away for good, are you, Aileen?" she concluded curiously and gravely.

"Oh, I don't know; I don't know what I'll do yet. I only know that I
want to get away for a while, just now--that's all." She paused, while
Mamie stood before her, agape.

"Well, of all things," replied her friend. "Wonders never cease, do
they, Aileen? But it will be so lovely to have you here. Mama will be
so pleased. Of course, we won't tell anybody if you don't want us to.
Hardly any one ever comes here; and if they do, you needn't see them.
You could have this big room next to me. Oh, wouldn't that be nice?
I'm perfectly delighted." The young school-teacher's spirits rose to a
decided height. "Come on, why not tell mama right now?"

Aileen hesitated because even now she was not positive whether she
should do this, but finally they went down the stairs together, Aileen
lingering behind a little as they neared the bottom. Mamie burst in upon
her mother with: "Oh, mama, isn't it lovely? Aileen's coming to stay
with us for a while. She doesn't want any one to know, and she's coming
right away." Mrs. Calligan, who was holding a sugarbowl in her hand,
turned to survey her with a surprised but smiling face. She was
immediately curious as to why Aileen should want to come--why leave
home. On the other hand, her feeling for Aileen was so deep that she
was greatly and joyously intrigued by the idea. And why not? Was not the
celebrated Edward Butler's daughter a woman grown, capable of regulating
her own affairs, and welcome, of course, as the honored member of so
important a family. It was very flattering to the Calligans to think
that she would want to come under any circumstances.

"I don't see how your parents can let you go, Aileen; but you're
certainly welcome here as long as you want to stay, and that's forever,
if you want to." And Mrs. Calligan beamed on her welcomingly. The idea
of Aileen Butler asking to be permitted to come here! And the hearty,
comprehending manner in which she said this, and Mamie's enthusiasm,
caused Aileen to breathe a sigh of relief. The matter of the expense of
her presence to the Calligans came into her mind.

"I want to pay you, of course," she said to Mrs. Calligan, "if I come."

"The very idea, Aileen Butler!" exclaimed Mamie. "You'll do nothing of
the sort. You'll come here and live with me as my guest."

"No, I won't! If I can't pay I won't come," replied Aileen. "You'll have
to let me do that." She knew that the Calligans could not afford to keep
her.

"Well, we'll not talk about that now, anyhow," replied Mrs. Calligan.
"You can come when you like and stay as long as you like. Reach me
some clean napkins, Mamie." Aileen remained for luncheon, and left soon
afterward to keep her suggested appointment with Cowperwood, feeling
satisfied that her main problem had been solved. Now her way was
clear. She could come here if she wanted to. It was simply a matter of
collecting a few necessary things or coming without bringing anything.
Perhaps Frank would have something to suggest.

In the meantime Cowperwood made no effort to communicate with Aileen
since the unfortunate discovery of their meeting place, but had awaited
a letter from her, which was not long in coming. And, as usual, it was a
long, optimistic, affectionate, and defiant screed in which she related
all that had occurred to her and her present plan of leaving home. This
last puzzled and troubled him not a little.

Aileen in the bosom of her family, smart and well-cared for, was one
thing. Aileen out in the world dependent on him was another. He had
never imagined that she would be compelled to leave before he was
prepared to take her; and if she did now, it might stir up complications
which would be anything but pleasant to contemplate. Still he was fond
of her, very, and would do anything to make her happy. He could support
her in a very respectable way even now, if he did not eventually go to
prison, and even there he might manage to make some shift for her. It
would be so much better, though, if he could persuade her to remain at
home until he knew exactly what his fate was to be. He never doubted but
that some day, whatever happened, within a reasonable length of time, he
would be rid of all these complications and well-to-do again, in which
case, if he could get a divorce, he wanted to marry Aileen. If not, he
would take her with him anyhow, and from this point of view it might
be just as well as if she broke away from her family now. But from the
point of view of present complications--the search Butler would make--it
might be dangerous. He might even publicly charge him with abduction. He
therefore decided to persuade Aileen to stay at home, drop meetings and
communications for the time being, and even go abroad. He would be all
right until she came back and so would she--common sense ought to rule
in this case.

With all this in mind he set out to keep the appointment she suggested
in her letter, nevertheless feeling it a little dangerous to do so.

"Are you sure," he asked, after he had listened to her description of
the Calligan homestead, "that you would like it there? It sounds rather
poor to me."

"Yes, but I like them so much," replied Aileen.

"And you're sure they won't tell on you?"

"Oh, no; never, never!"

"Very well," he concluded. "You know what you're doing. I don't want
to advise you against your will. If I were you, though, I'd take your
father's advice and go away for a while. He'll get over this then, and
I'll still be here. I can write you occasionally, and you can write me."

The moment Cowperwood said this Aileen's brow clouded. Her love for him
was so great that there was something like a knife thrust in the merest
hint at an extended separation. Her Frank here and in trouble--on trial
maybe and she away! Never! What could he mean by suggesting such a
thing? Could it be that he didn't care for her as much as she did for
him? Did he really love her? she asked herself. Was he going to desert
her just when she was going to do the thing which would bring them
nearer together? Her eyes clouded, for she was terribly hurt.

"Why, how you talk!" she exclaimed. "You know I won't leave Philadelphia
now. You certainly don't expect me to leave you."

Cowperwood saw it all very clearly. He was too shrewd not to. He was
immensely fond of her. Good heaven, he thought, he would not hurt her
feelings for the world!

"Honey," he said, quickly, when he saw her eyes, "you don't understand.
I want you to do what you want to do. You've planned this out in order
to be with me; so now you do it. Don't think any more about me or
anything I've said. I was merely thinking that it might make matters
worse for both of us; but I don't believe it will. You think your father
loves you so much that after you're gone he'll change his mind. Very
good; go. But we must be very careful, sweet--you and I--really we must.
This thing is getting serious. If you should go and your father should
charge me with abduction--take the public into his confidence and tell
all about this, it would be serious for both of us--as much for you as
for me, for I'd be convicted sure then, just on that account, if nothing
else. And then what? You'd better not try to see me often for the
present--not any oftener than we can possibly help. If we had used
common sense and stopped when your father got that letter, this wouldn't
have happened. But now that it has happened, we must be as wise as we
can, don't you see? So, think it over, and do what you think best and
then write me and whatever you do will be all right with me--do you
hear?" He drew her to him and kissed her. "You haven't any money, have
you?" he concluded wisely.

Aileen, deeply moved by all he had just said, was none the less
convinced once she had meditated on it a moment, that her course was
best. Her father loved her too much. He would not do anything to hurt
her publicly and so he would not attack Cowperwood through her openly.
More than likely, as she now explained to Frank, he would plead with her
to come back. And he, listening, was compelled to yield. Why argue? She
would not leave him anyhow.

He went down in his pocket for the first time since he had known Aileen
and produced a layer of bills. "Here's two hundred dollars, sweet," he
said, "until I see or hear from you. I'll see that you have whatever
you need; and now don't think that I don't love you. You know I do. I'm
crazy about you."

Aileen protested that she did not need so much--that she did not really
need any--she had some at home; but he put that aside. He knew that she
must have money.

"Don't talk, honey," he said. "I know what you need." She had been
so used to receiving money from her father and mother in comfortable
amounts from time to time that she thought nothing of it. Frank loved
her so much that it made everything right between them. She softened
in her mood and they discussed the matter of letters, reaching the
conclusion that a private messenger would be safest. When finally they
parted, Aileen, from being sunk in the depths by his uncertain attitude,
was now once more on the heights. She decided that he did love her, and
went away smiling. She had her Frank to fall back on--she would teach
her father. Cowperwood shook his head, following her with his eyes. She
represented an additional burden, but give her up, he certainly could
not. Tear the veil from this illusion of affection and make her feel so
wretched when he cared for her so much? No. There was really nothing for
him to do but what he had done. After all, he reflected, it might not
work out so badly. Any detective work that Butler might choose to do
would prove that she had not run to him. If at any moment it became
necessary to bring common sense into play to save the situation from
a deadly climax, he could have the Butlers secretly informed as to
Aileen's whereabouts. That would show he had little to do with it,
and they could try to persuade Aileen to come home again. Good might
result--one could not tell. He would deal with the evils as they arose.
He drove quickly back to his office, and Aileen returned to her home
determined to put her plan into action. Her father had given her some
little time in which to decide--possibly he would give her longer--but
she would not wait. Having always had her wish granted in everything,
she could not understand why she was not to have her way this time. It
was about five o'clock now. She would wait until all the members of the
family were comfortably seated at the dinner-table, which would be about
seven o'clock, and then slip out.

On arriving home, however, she was greeted by an unexpected reason
for suspending action. This was the presence of a certain Mr. and Mrs.
Steinmetz--the former a well-known engineer who drew the plans for many
of the works which Butler undertook. It was the day before Thanksgiving,
and they were eager to have Aileen and Norah accompany them for
a fortnight's stay at their new home in West Chester--a structure
concerning the charm of which Aileen had heard much. They were
exceedingly agreeable people--comparatively young and surrounded by a
coterie of interesting friends. Aileen decided to delay her flight and
go. Her father was most cordial. The presence and invitation of the
Steinmetzes was as much a relief to him as it was to Aileen. West
Chester being forty miles from Philadelphia, it was unlikely that Aileen
would attempt to meet Cowperwood while there.

She wrote Cowperwood of the changed condition and departed, and he
breathed a sigh of relief, fancying at the time that this storm had
permanently blown over.




