

When Cowperwood came into the crowded courtroom with his father
and Steger, quite fresh and jaunty (looking the part of the shrewd
financier, the man of affairs), every one stared. It was really too
much to expect, most of them thought, that a man like this would be
convicted. He was, no doubt, guilty; but, also, no doubt, he had ways
and means of evading the law. His lawyer, Harper Steger, looked very
shrewd and canny to them. It was very cold, and both men wore long,
dark, bluish-gray overcoats, cut in the latest mode. Cowperwood was
given to small boutonnieres in fair weather, but to-day he wore none.
His tie, however, was of heavy, impressive silk, of lavender hue,
set with a large, clear, green emerald. He wore only the thinnest of
watch-chains, and no other ornament of any kind. He always looked jaunty
and yet reserved, good-natured, and yet capable and self-sufficient.
Never had he looked more so than he did to-day.

He at once took in the nature of the scene, which had a peculiar
interest for him. Before him was the as yet empty judge's rostrum, and
at its right the empty jury-box, between which, and to the judge's left,
as he sat facing the audience, stood the witness-chair where he must
presently sit and testify. Behind it, already awaiting the arrival of
the court, stood a fat bailiff, one John Sparkheaver whose business it
was to present the aged, greasy Bible to be touched by the witnesses in
making oath, and to say, "Step this way," when the testimony was over.
There were other bailiffs--one at the gate giving into the railed space
before the judge's desk, where prisoners were arraigned, lawyers sat
or pleaded, the defendant had a chair, and so on; another in the aisle
leading to the jury-room, and still another guarding the door by which
the public entered. Cowperwood surveyed Stener, who was one of the
witnesses, and who now, in his helpless fright over his own fate, was
without malice toward any one. He had really never borne any. He wished
if anything now that he had followed Cowperwood's advice, seeing where
he now was, though he still had faith that Mollenhauer and the political
powers represented by him would do something for him with the governor,
once he was sentenced. He was very pale and comparatively thin. Already
he had lost that ruddy bulk which had been added during the days of
his prosperity. He wore a new gray suit and a brown tie, and was
clean-shaven. When his eye caught Cowperwood's steady beam, it faltered
and drooped. He rubbed his ear foolishly. Cowperwood nodded.

"You know," he said to Steger, "I feel sorry for George. He's such a
fool. Still I did all I could."

Cowperwood also watched Mrs. Stener out of the tail of his eye--an
undersized, peaked, and sallow little woman, whose clothes fitted her
abominably. It was just like Stener to marry a woman like that, he
thought. The scrubby matches of the socially unelect or unfit always
interested, though they did not always amuse, him. Mrs. Stener had no
affection for Cowperwood, of course, looking on him, as she did, as the
unscrupulous cause of her husband's downfall. They were now quite poor
again, about to move from their big house into cheaper quarters; and
this was not pleasing for her to contemplate.

Judge Payderson came in after a time, accompanied by his undersized but
stout court attendant, who looked more like a pouter-pigeon than a human
being; and as they came, Bailiff Sparkheaver rapped on the judge's desk,
beside which he had been slumbering, and mumbled, "Please rise!" The
audience arose, as is the rule of all courts. Judge Payderson stirred
among a number of briefs that were lying on his desk, and asked,
briskly, "What's the first case, Mr. Protus?" He was speaking to his
clerk.

During the long and tedious arrangement of the day's docket and while
the various minor motions of lawyers were being considered, this
courtroom scene still retained interest for Cowperwood. He was so eager
to win, so incensed at the outcome of untoward events which had brought
him here. He was always intensely irritated, though he did not show
it, by the whole process of footing delays and queries and quibbles, by
which legally the affairs of men were too often hampered. Law, if you
had asked him, and he had accurately expressed himself, was a mist
formed out of the moods and the mistakes of men, which befogged the sea
of life and prevented plain sailing for the little commercial and social
barques of men; it was a miasma of misinterpretation where the ills
of life festered, and also a place where the accidentally wounded were
ground between the upper and the nether millstones of force or chance;
it was a strange, weird, interesting, and yet futile battle of wits
where the ignorant and the incompetent and the shrewd and the angry and
the weak were made pawns and shuttlecocks for men--lawyers, who were
playing upon their moods, their vanities, their desires, and their
necessities. It was an unholy and unsatisfactory disrupting and delaying
spectacle, a painful commentary on the frailties of life, and men, a
trick, a snare, a pit and gin. In the hands of the strong, like himself
when he was at his best, the law was a sword and a shield, a trap to
place before the feet of the unwary; a pit to dig in the path of those
who might pursue. It was anything you might choose to make of it--a door
to illegal opportunity; a cloud of dust to be cast in the eyes of
those who might choose, and rightfully, to see; a veil to be dropped
arbitrarily between truth and its execution, justice and its judgment,
crime and punishment. Lawyers in the main were intellectual mercenaries
to be bought and sold in any cause. It amused him to hear the ethical
and emotional platitudes of lawyers, to see how readily they would
lie, steal, prevaricate, misrepresent in almost any cause and for any
purpose. Great lawyers were merely great unscrupulous subtleties,
like himself, sitting back in dark, close-woven lairs like spiders and
awaiting the approach of unwary human flies. Life was at best a dark,
inhuman, unkind, unsympathetic struggle built of cruelties and the law,
and its lawyers were the most despicable representatives of the whole
unsatisfactory mess. Still he used law as he would use any other trap or
weapon to rid him of a human ill; and as for lawyers, he picked them
up as he would any club or knife wherewith to defend himself. He had no
particular respect for any of them--not even Harper Steger, though he
liked him. They were tools to be used--knives, keys, clubs, anything
you will; but nothing more. When they were through they were paid
and dropped--put aside and forgotten. As for judges, they were merely
incompetent lawyers, at a rule, who were shelved by some fortunate turn
of chance, and who would not, in all likelihood, be as efficient as the
lawyers who pleaded before them if they were put in the same position.
He had no respect for judges--he knew too much about them. He knew how
often they were sycophants, political climbers, political hacks, tools,
time-servers, judicial door-mats lying before the financially and
politically great and powerful who used them as such. Judges were
fools, as were most other people in this dusty, shifty world. Pah! His
inscrutable eyes took them all in and gave no sign. His only safety lay,
he thought, in the magnificent subtley of his own brain, and nowhere
else. You could not convince Cowperwood of any great or inherent virtue
in this mortal scheme of things. He knew too much; he knew himself.

When the judge finally cleared away the various minor motions pending,
he ordered his clerk to call the case of the City of Philadelphia
versus Frank A. Cowperwood, which was done in a clear voice. Both Dennis
Shannon, the new district attorney, and Steger, were on their feet at
once. Steger and Cowperwood, together with Shannon and Strobik, who
had now come in and was standing as the representative of the State of
Pennsylvania--the complainant--had seated themselves at the long table
inside the railing which inclosed the space before the judge's desk.
Steger proposed to Judge Payderson, for effect's sake more than anything
else, that this indictment be quashed, but was overruled.

A jury to try the case was now quickly impaneled--twelve men out of
the usual list called to serve for the month--and was then ready to be
challenged by the opposing counsel. The business of impaneling a
jury was a rather simple thing so far as this court was concerned. It
consisted in the mandarin-like clerk taking the names of all the jurors
called to serve in this court for the month--some fifty in all--and
putting them, each written on a separate slip of paper, in a whirling
drum, spinning it around a few times, and then lifting out the first
slip which his hand encountered, thus glorifying chance and settling on
who should be juror No. 1. His hand reaching in twelve times drew out
the names of the twelve jurymen, who as their names were called, were
ordered to take their places in the jury-box.

Cowperwood observed this proceeding with a great deal of interest. What
could be more important than the men who were going to try him? The
process was too swift for accurate judgment, but he received a faint
impression of middle-class men. One man in particular, however, an
old man of sixty-five, with iron-gray hair and beard, shaggy eyebrows,
sallow complexion, and stooped shoulders, struck him as having that
kindness of temperament and breadth of experience which might under
certain circumstances be argumentatively swayed in his favor. Another,
a small, sharp-nosed, sharp-chinned commercial man of some kind, he
immediately disliked.

"I hope I don't have to have that man on my jury," he said to Steger,
quietly.

"You don't," replied Steger. "I'll challenge him. We have the right
to fifteen peremptory challenges on a case like this, and so has the
prosecution."

When the jury-box was finally full, the two lawyers waited for the clerk
to bring them the small board upon which slips of paper bearing the
names of the twelve jurors were fastened in rows in order of their
selection--jurors one, two, and three being in the first row; four,
five, and six in the second, and so on. It being the prerogative of the
attorney for the prosecution to examine and challenge the jurors first,
Shannon arose, and, taking the board, began to question them as to their
trades or professions, their knowledge of the case before the court, and
their possible prejudice for or against the prisoner.

It was the business of both Steger and Shannon to find men who knew a
little something of finance and could understand a peculiar situation
of this kind without any of them (looking at it from Steger's point of
view) having any prejudice against a man's trying to assist himself by
reasonable means to weather a financial storm or (looking at it from
Shannon's point of view) having any sympathy with such means, if they
bore about them the least suspicion of chicanery, jugglery, or dishonest
manipulation of any kind. As both Shannon and Steger in due course
observed for themselves in connection with this jury, it was composed of
that assorted social fry which the dragnets of the courts, cast into the
ocean of the city, bring to the surface for purposes of this sort.
It was made up in the main of managers, agents, tradesmen, editors,
engineers, architects, furriers, grocers, traveling salesmen, authors,
and every other kind of working citizen whose experience had fitted
him for service in proceedings of this character. Rarely would you have
found a man of great distinction; but very frequently a group of men who
were possessed of no small modicum of that interesting quality known as
hard common sense.

Throughout all this Cowperwood sat quietly examining the men. A young
florist, with a pale face, a wide speculative forehead, and anemic
hands, struck him as being sufficiently impressionable to his personal
charm to be worth while. He whispered as much to Steger. There was a
shrewd Jew, a furrier, who was challenged because he had read all of the
news of the panic and had lost two thousand dollars in street-railway
stocks. There was a stout wholesale grocer, with red cheeks, blue eyes,
and flaxen hair, who Cowperwood said he thought was stubborn. He was
eliminated. There was a thin, dapper manager of a small retail clothing
store, very anxious to be excused, who declared, falsely, that he
did not believe in swearing by the Bible. Judge Payderson, eyeing him
severely, let him go. There were some ten more in all--men who knew
of Cowperwood, men who admitted they were prejudiced, men who were
hidebound Republicans and resentful of this crime, men who knew
Stener--who were pleasantly eliminated.

By twelve o'clock, however, a jury reasonably satisfactory to both sides
had been chosen.




