

The trial moved on. One witness for the prosecution after another
followed until the State had built up an arraignment that satisfied
Shannon that he had established Cowperwood's guilt, whereupon he
announced that he rested. Steger at once arose and began a long argument
for the dismissal of the case on the ground that there was no evidence
to show this, that and the other, but Judge Payderson would have none of
it. He knew how important the matter was in the local political world.

"I don't think you had better go into all that now, Mr. Steger," he
said, wearily, after allowing him to proceed a reasonable distance. "I
am familiar with the custom of the city, and the indictment as here made
does not concern the custom of the city. Your argument is with the jury,
not with me. I couldn't enter into that now. You may renew your motion
at the close of the defendants' case. Motion denied."

District-Attorney Shannon, who had been listening attentively, sat down.
Steger, seeing there was no chance to soften the judge's mind by any
subtlety of argument, returned to Cowperwood, who smiled at the result.

"We'll just have to take our chances with the jury," he announced.

"I was sure of it," replied Cowperwood.

Steger then approached the jury, and, having outlined the case briefly
from his angle of observation, continued by telling them what he was
sure the evidence would show from his point of view.

"As a matter of fact, gentlemen, there is no essential difference in
the evidence which the prosecution can present and that which we, the
defense, can present. We are not going to dispute that Mr. Cowperwood
received a check from Mr. Stener for sixty thousand dollars, or that
he failed to put the certificate of city loan which that sum of money
represented, and to which he was entitled in payment as agent, in the
sinking-fund, as the prosecution now claims he should have done; but
we are going to claim and prove also beyond the shadow of a reasonable
doubt that he had a right, as the agent of the city, doing business with
the city through its treasury department for four years, to withhold,
under an agreement which he had with the city treasurer, all payments
of money and all deposits of certificates in the sinking-fund until the
first day of each succeeding month--the first month following any given
transaction. As a matter of fact we can and will bring many traders and
bankers who have had dealings with the city treasury in the past in just
this way to prove this. The prosecution is going to ask you to believe
that Mr. Cowperwood knew at the time he received this check that he was
going to fail; that he did not buy the certificates, as he claimed, with
the view of placing them in the sinking-fund; and that, knowing he
was going to fail, and that he could not subsequently deposit them, he
deliberately went to Mr. Albert Stires, Mr. Stener's secretary, told
him that he had purchased such certificates, and on the strength of a
falsehood, implied if not actually spoken, secured the check, and walked
away.

"Now, gentlemen, I am not going to enter into a long-winded discussion
of these points at this time, since the testimony is going to show very
rapidly what the facts are. We have a number of witnesses here, and
we are all anxious to have them heard. What I am going to ask you to
remember is that there is not one scintilla of testimony outside of that
which may possibly be given by Mr. George W. Stener, which will show
either that Mr. Cowperwood knew, at the time he called on the city
treasurer, that he was going to fail, or that he had not purchased the
certificates in question, or that he had not the right to withhold
them from the sinking-fund as long as he pleased up to the first of
the month, the time he invariably struck a balance with the city.
Mr. Stener, the ex-city treasurer, may possibly testify one way. Mr.
Cowperwood, on his own behalf, will testify another. It will then be for
you gentlemen to decide between them, to decide which one you prefer
to believe--Mr. George W. Stener, the ex-city treasurer, the former
commercial associate of Mr. Cowperwood, who, after years and years of
profit, solely because of conditions of financial stress, fire, and
panic, preferred to turn on his one-time associate from whose labors he
had reaped so much profit, or Mr. Frank A. Cowperwood, the well-known
banker and financier, who did his best to weather the storm alone, who
fulfilled to the letter every agreement he ever had with the city, who
has even until this hour been busy trying to remedy the unfair financial
difficulties forced upon him by fire and panic, and who only yesterday
made an offer to the city that, if he were allowed to continue in
uninterrupted control of his affairs he would gladly repay as quickly as
possible every dollar of his indebtedness (which is really not all his),
including the five hundred thousand dollars under discussion between him
and Mr. Stener and the city, and so prove by his works, not talk, that
there was no basis for this unfair suspicion of his motives. As you
perhaps surmise, the city has not chosen to accept his offer, and I
shall try and tell you why later, gentlemen. For the present we will
proceed with the testimony, and for the defense all I ask is that you
give very close attention to all that is testified to here to-day.
Listen very carefully to Mr. W. C. Davison when he is put on the stand.
Listen equally carefully to Mr. Cowperwood when we call him to testify.
Follow the other testimony closely, and then you will be able to judge
for yourselves. See if you can distinguish a just motive for this
prosecution. I can't. I am very much obliged to you for listening to me,
gentlemen, so attentively."

He then put on Arthur Rivers, who had acted for Cowperwood on 'change
as special agent during the panic, to testify to the large quantities
of city loan he had purchased to stay the market; and then after him,
Cowperwood's brothers, Edward and Joseph, who testified to instructions
received from Rivers as to buying and selling city loan on that
occasion--principally buying.

The next witness was President W. C. Davison of the Girard National
Bank. He was a large man physically, not so round of body as full and
broad. His shoulders and chest were ample. He had a big blond head, with
an ample breadth of forehead, which was high and sane-looking. He had
a thick, squat nose, which, however, was forceful, and thin, firm, even
lips. There was the faintest touch of cynical humor in his hard blue
eyes at times; but mostly he was friendly, alert, placid-looking,
without seeming in the least sentimental or even kindly. His business,
as one could see plainly, was to insist on hard financial facts, and
one could see also how he would naturally be drawn to Frank Algernon
Cowperwood without being mentally dominated or upset by him. As he took
the chair very quietly, and yet one might say significantly, it was
obvious that he felt that this sort of legal-financial palaver was above
the average man and beneath the dignity of a true financier--in other
words, a bother. The drowsy Sparkheaver holding up a Bible beside him
for him to swear by might as well have been a block of wood. His oath
was a personal matter with him. It was good business to tell the truth
at times. His testimony was very direct and very simple.

He had known Mr. Frank Algernon Cowperwood for nearly ten years. He
had done business with or through him nearly all of that time. He knew
nothing of his personal relations with Mr. Stener, and did not know
Mr. Stener personally. As for the particular check of sixty thousand
dollars--yes, he had seen it before. It had come into the bank on
October 10th along with other collateral to offset an overdraft on the
part of Cowperwood & Co. It was placed to the credit of Cowperwood &
Co. on the books of the bank, and the bank secured the cash through the
clearing-house. No money was drawn out of the bank by Cowperwood & Co.
after that to create an overdraft. The bank's account with Cowperwood
was squared.

Nevertheless, Mr. Cowperwood might have drawn heavily, and nothing would
have been thought of it. Mr. Davison did not know that Mr. Cowperwood
was going to fail--did not suppose that he could, so quickly. He had
frequently overdrawn his account with the bank; as a matter of fact,
it was the regular course of his business to overdraw it. It kept his
assets actively in use, which was the height of good business. His
overdrafts were protected by collateral, however, and it was his custom
to send bundles of collateral or checks, or both, which were variously
distributed to keep things straight. Mr. Cowperwood's account was the
largest and most active in the bank, Mr. Davison kindly volunteered.
When Mr. Cowperwood had failed there had been over ninety thousand
dollars' worth of certificates of city loan in the bank's possession
which Mr Cowperwood had sent there as collateral. Shannon, on
cross-examination, tried to find out for the sake of the effect on the
jury, whether Mr. Davison was not for some ulterior motive especially
favorable to Cowperwood. It was not possible for him to do that. Steger
followed, and did his best to render the favorable points made by Mr.
Davison in Cowperwood's behalf perfectly clear to the jury by having him
repeat them. Shannon objected, of course, but it was of no use. Steger
managed to make his point.

He now decided to have Cowperwood take the stand, and at the mention of
his name in this connection the whole courtroom bristled.

Cowperwood came forward briskly and quickly. He was so calm, so jaunty,
so defiant of life, and yet so courteous to it. These lawyers, this
jury, this straw-and-water judge, these machinations of fate, did not
basically disturb or humble or weaken him. He saw through the mental
equipment of the jury at once. He wanted to assist his counsel in
disturbing and confusing Shannon, but his reason told him that only an
indestructible fabric of fact or seeming would do it. He believed in the
financial rightness of the thing he had done. He was entitled to do it.
Life was war--particularly financial life; and strategy was its keynote,
its duty, its necessity. Why should he bother about petty, picayune
minds which could not understand this? He went over his history for
Steger and the jury, and put the sanest, most comfortable light on it
that he could. He had not gone to Mr. Stener in the first place, he
said--he had been called. He had not urged Mr. Stener to anything. He
had merely shown him and his friends financial possibilities which they
were only too eager to seize upon. And they had seized upon them. (It
was not possible for Shannon to discover at this period how subtly he
had organized his street-car companies so that he could have "shaken
out" Stener and his friends without their being able to voice a single
protest, so he talked of these things as opportunities which he had made
for Stener and others. Shannon was not a financier, neither was
Steger. They had to believe in a way, though they doubted it,
partly--particularly Shannon.) He was not responsible for the custom
prevailing in the office of the city treasurer, he said. He was a banker
and broker.

The jury looked at him, and believed all except this matter of the
sixty-thousand-dollar check. When it came to that he explained it all
plausibly enough. When he had gone to see Stener those several last
days, he had not fancied that he was really going to fail. He had
asked Stener for some money, it is true--not so very much, all things
considered--one hundred and fifty thousand dollars; but, as Stener
should have testified, he (Cowperwood) was not disturbed in his manner.
Stener had merely been one resource of his. He was satisfied at that
time that he had many others. He had not used the forceful language or
made the urgent appeal which Stener said he had, although he had pointed
out to Stener that it was a mistake to become panic-stricken, also to
withhold further credit. It was true that Stener was his easiest, his
quickest resource, but not his only one. He thought, as a matter of
fact, that his credit would be greatly extended by his principal money
friends if necessary, and that he would have ample time to patch up his
affairs and keep things going until the storm should blow over. He had
told Stener of his extended purchase of city loan to stay the market on
the first day of the panic, and of the fact that sixty thousand dollars
was due him. Stener had made no objection. It was just possible that
he was too mentally disturbed at the time to pay close attention. After
that, to his, Cowperwood's, surprise, unexpected pressure on great
financial houses from unexpected directions had caused them to be not
willingly but unfortunately severe with him. This pressure, coming
collectively the next day, had compelled him to close his doors, though
he had not really expected to up to the last moment. His call for the
sixty-thousand-dollar check at the time had been purely fortuitous. He
needed the money, of course, but it was due him, and his clerks were
all very busy. He merely asked for and took it personally to save time.
Stener knew if it had been refused him he would have brought suit. The
matter of depositing city loan certificates in the sinking-fund,
when purchased for the city, was something to which he never gave any
personal attention whatsoever. His bookkeeper, Mr. Stapley, attended to
all that. He did not know, as a matter of fact, that they had not been
deposited. (This was a barefaced lie. He did know.) As for the check
being turned over to the Girard National Bank, that was fortuitous.
It might just as well have been turned over to some other bank if the
conditions had been different.

Thus on and on he went, answering all of Steger's and Shannon's
searching questions with the most engaging frankness, and you could have
sworn from the solemnity with which he took it all--the serious business
attention--that he was the soul of so-called commercial honor. And to
say truly, he did believe in the justice as well as the necessity and
the importance of all that he had done and now described. He wanted the
jury to see it as he saw it--put itself in his place and sympathize with
him.

He was through finally, and the effect on the jury of his testimony and
his personality was peculiar. Philip Moultrie, juror No. 1, decided that
Cowperwood was lying. He could not see how it was possible that he could
not know the day before that he was going to fail. He must have known,
he thought. Anyhow, the whole series of transactions between him
and Stener seemed deserving of some punishment, and all during this
testimony he was thinking how, when he got in the jury-room, he would
vote guilty. He even thought of some of the arguments he would use to
convince the others that Cowperwood was guilty. Juror No. 2, on the
contrary, Simon Glassberg, a clothier, thought he understood how it
all came about, and decided to vote for acquittal. He did not think
Cowperwood was innocent, but he did not think he deserved to be
punished. Juror No. 3, Fletcher Norton, an architect, thought Cowperwood
was guilty, but at the same time that he was too talented to be sent to
prison. Juror No. 4, Charles Hillegan, an Irishman, a contractor, and
a somewhat religious-minded person, thought Cowperwood was guilty and
ought to be punished. Juror No. 5, Philip Lukash, a coal merchant,
thought he was guilty. Juror No. 6, Benjamin Fraser, a mining expert,
thought he was probably guilty, but he could not be sure. Uncertain
what he would do, juror No. 7, J. J. Bridges, a broker in Third Street,
small, practical, narrow, thought Cowperwood was shrewd and guilty and
deserved to be punished. He would vote for his punishment. Juror No.
8, Guy E. Tripp, general manager of a small steamboat company, was
uncertain. Juror No. 9, Joseph Tisdale, a retired glue manufacturer,
thought Cowperwood was probably guilty as charged, but to Tisdale it
was no crime. Cowperwood was entitled to do as he had done under the
circumstances. Tisdale would vote for his acquittal. Juror No. 10,
Richard Marsh, a young florist, was for Cowperwood in a sentimental way.
He had, as a matter of fact, no real convictions. Juror No. 11, Richard
Webber, a grocer, small financially, but heavy physically, was for
Cowperwood's conviction. He thought him guilty. Juror No. 12, Washington
B. Thomas, a wholesale flour merchant, thought Cowperwood was guilty,
but believed in a recommendation to mercy after pronouncing him so. Men
ought to be reformed, was his slogan.

So they stood, and so Cowperwood left them, wondering whether any of his
testimony had had a favorable effect.




