

When Cowperwood reached the jail, Jaspers was there, glad to see him but
principally relieved to feel that nothing had happened to mar his
own reputation as a sheriff. Because of the urgency of court matters
generally, it was decided to depart for the courtroom at nine o'clock.
Eddie Zanders was once more delegated to see that Cowperwood was brought
safely before Judge Payderson and afterward taken to the penitentiary.
All of the papers in the case were put in his care to be delivered to
the warden.

"I suppose you know," confided Sheriff Jaspers to Steger, "that Stener
is here. He ain't got no money now, but I gave him a private room just
the same. I didn't want to put a man like him in no cell." Sheriff
Jaspers sympathized with Stener.

"That's right. I'm glad to hear that," replied Steger, smiling to
himself.

"I didn't suppose from what I've heard that Mr. Cowperwood would want to
meet Stener here, so I've kept 'em apart. George just left a minute ago
with another deputy."

"That's good. That's the way it ought to be," replied Steger. He was
glad for Cowperwood's sake that the sheriff had so much tact. Evidently
George and the sheriff were getting along in a very friendly way, for
all the former's bitter troubles and lack of means.

The Cowperwood party walked, the distance not being great, and as they
did so they talked of rather simple things to avoid the more serious.

"Things aren't going to be so bad," Edward said to his father. "Steger
says the Governor is sure to pardon Stener in a year or less, and if he
does he's bound to let Frank out too."

Cowperwood, the elder, had heard this over and over, but he was never
tired of hearing it. It was like some simple croon with which babies are
hushed to sleep. The snow on the ground, which was enduring remarkably
well for this time of year, the fineness of the day, which had started
out to be clear and bright, the hope that the courtroom might not be
full, all held the attention of the father and his two sons. Cowperwood,
senior, even commented on some sparrows fighting over a piece of
bread, marveling how well they did in winter, solely to ease his
mind. Cowperwood, walking on ahead with Steger and Zanders, talked of
approaching court proceedings in connection with his business and what
ought to be done.

When they reached the court the same little pen in which Cowperwood had
awaited the verdict of his jury several months before was waiting to
receive him.

Cowperwood, senior, and his other sons sought places in the courtroom
proper. Eddie Zanders remained with his charge. Stener and a deputy by
the name of Wilkerson were in the room; but he and Cowperwood pretended
now not to see each other. Frank had no objection to talking to his
former associate, but he could see that Stener was diffident and
ashamed. So he let the situation pass without look or word of any kind.
After some three-quarters of an hour of dreary waiting the door leading
into the courtroom proper opened and a bailiff stepped in.

"All prisoners up for sentence," he called.

There were six, all told, including Cowperwood and Stener. Two of them
were confederate housebreakers who had been caught red-handed at their
midnight task.

Another prisoner was no more and no less than a plain horse-thief, a
young man of twenty-six, who had been convicted by a jury of stealing
a grocer's horse and selling it. The last man was a negro, a tall,
shambling, illiterate, nebulous-minded black, who had walked off with
an apparently discarded section of lead pipe which he had found in a
lumber-yard. His idea was to sell or trade it for a drink. He really
did not belong in this court at all; but, having been caught by an
undersized American watchman charged with the care of the property, and
having at first refused to plead guilty, not quite understanding what
was to be done with him, he had been perforce bound over to this court
for trial. Afterward he had changed his mind and admitted his guilt, so
he now had to come before Judge Payderson for sentence or dismissal.
The lower court before which he had originally been brought had lost
jurisdiction by binding him over to to higher court for trial.
Eddie Zanders, in his self-appointed position as guide and mentor to
Cowperwood, had confided nearly all of this data to him as he stood
waiting.

The courtroom was crowded. It was very humiliating to Cowperwood to have
to file in this way along the side aisle with these others, followed by
Stener, well dressed but sickly looking and disconsolate.

The negro, Charles Ackerman, was the first on the list.

"How is it this man comes before me?" asked Payderson, peevishly, when
he noted the value of the property Ackerman was supposed to have stolen.

"Your honor," the assistant district attorney explained, promptly,
"this man was before a lower court and refused, because he was drunk,
or something, to plead guilty. The lower court, because the complainant
would not forego the charge, was compelled to bind him over to this
court for trial. Since then he has changed his mind and has admitted
his guilt to the district attorney. He would not be brought before you
except we have no alternative. He has to be brought here now in order to
clear the calendar."

Judge Payderson stared quizzically at the negro, who, obviously not very
much disturbed by this examination, was leaning comfortably on the gate
or bar before which the average criminal stood erect and terrified.
He had been before police-court magistrates before on one charge and
another--drunkenness, disorderly conduct, and the like--but his whole
attitude was one of shambling, lackadaisical, amusing innocence.

"Well, Ackerman," inquired his honor, severely, "did you or did you not
steal this piece of lead pipe as charged here--four dollars and eighty
cents' worth?"

"Yassah, I did," he began. "I tell you how it was, jedge. I was a-comin'
along past dat lumber-yard one Saturday afternoon, and I hadn't been
wuckin', an' I saw dat piece o' pipe thoo de fence, lyin' inside, and I
jes' reached thoo with a piece o' boad I found dey and pulled it over
to me an' tuck it. An' aftahwahd dis Mistah Watchman man"--he waved his
hand oratorically toward the witness-chair, where, in case the judge
might wish to ask him some questions, the complainant had taken his
stand--"come around tuh where I live an' accused me of done takin' it."

"But you did take it, didn't you?"

"Yassah, I done tuck it."

"What did you do with it?"

"I traded it foh twenty-five cents."

"You mean you sold it," corrected his honor.

"Yassah, I done sold it."

"Well, don't you know it's wrong to do anything like that? Didn't you
know when you reached through that fence and pulled that pipe over to
you that you were stealing? Didn't you?"

"Yassah, I knowed it was wrong," replied Ackerman, sheepishly. "I didn'
think 'twuz stealin' like zackly, but I done knowed it was wrong. I done
knowed I oughtn' take it, I guess."

"Of course you did. Of course you did. That's just it. You knew you were
stealing, and still you took it. Has the man to whom this negro sold
the lead pipe been apprehended yet?" the judge inquired sharply of the
district attorney. "He should be, for he's more guilty than this negro,
a receiver of stolen goods."

"Yes, sir," replied the assistant. "His case is before Judge Yawger."

"Quite right. It should be," replied Payderson, severely. "This matter
of receiving stolen property is one of the worst offenses, in my
judgment."

He then turned his attention to Ackerman again. "Now, look here,
Ackerman," he exclaimed, irritated at having to bother with such a
pretty case, "I want to say something to you, and I want you to pay
strict attention to me. Straighten up, there! Don't lean on that gate!
You are in the presence of the law now." Ackerman had sprawled himself
comfortably down on his elbows as he would have if he had been leaning
over a back-fence gate talking to some one, but he immediately drew
himself straight, still grinning foolishly and apologetically, when he
heard this. "You are not so dull but that you can understand what I am
going to say to you. The offense you have committed--stealing a piece
of lead pipe--is a crime. Do you hear me? A criminal offense--one that I
could punish you very severely for. I could send you to the penitentiary
for one year if I chose--the law says I may--one year at hard labor for
stealing a piece of lead pipe. Now, if you have any sense you will pay
strict attention to what I am going to tell you. I am not going to send
you to the penitentiary right now. I'm going to wait a little while. I
am going to sentence you to one year in the penitentiary--one year.
Do you understand?" Ackerman blanched a little and licked his lips
nervously. "And then I am going to suspend that sentence--hold it over
your head, so that if you are ever caught taking anything else you will
be punished for this offense and the next one also at one and the same
time. Do you understand that? Do you know what I mean? Tell me. Do you?"

"Yessah! I does, sir," replied the negro. "You'se gwine to let me go
now--tha's it."

The audience grinned, and his honor made a wry face to prevent his own
grim grin.

"I'm going to let you go only so long as you don't steal anything else,"
he thundered. "The moment you steal anything else, back you come to this
court, and then you go to the penitentiary for a year and whatever
more time you deserve. Do you understand that? Now, I want you to
walk straight out of this court and behave yourself. Don't ever steal
anything. Get something to do! Don't steal, do you hear? Don't touch
anything that doesn't belong to you! Don't come back here! If you do,
I'll send you to the penitentiary, sure."

"Yassah! No, sah, I won't," replied Ackerman, nervously. "I won't take
nothin' more that don't belong tuh me."

He shuffled away, after a moment, urged along by the guiding hand of a
bailiff, and was put safely outside the court, amid a mixture of smiles
and laughter over his simplicity and Payderson's undue severity of
manner. But the next case was called and soon engrossed the interest of
the audience.

It was that of the two housebreakers whom Cowperwood had been and was
still studying with much curiosity. In all his life before he had never
witnessed a sentencing scene of any kind. He had never been in police
or criminal courts of any kind--rarely in any of the civil ones. He
was glad to see the negro go, and gave Payderson credit for having some
sense and sympathy--more than he had expected.

He wondered now whether by any chance Aileen was here. He had objected
to her coming, but she might have done so. She was, as a matter of fact,
in the extreme rear, pocketed in a crowd near the door, heavily veiled,
but present. She had not been able to resist the desire to know quickly
and surely her beloved's fate--to be near him in his hour of real
suffering, as she thought. She was greatly angered at seeing him brought
in with a line of ordinary criminals and made to wait in this, to her,
shameful public manner, but she could not help admiring all the more the
dignity and superiority of his presence even here. He was not even pale,
as she saw, just the same firm, calm soul she had always known him to
be. If he could only see her now; if he would only look so she could
lift her veil and smile! He didn't, though; he wouldn't. He didn't want
to see her here. But she would tell him all about it when she saw him
again just the same.

The two burglars were quickly disposed of by the judge, with a sentence
of one year each, and they were led away, uncertain, and apparently not
knowing what to think of their crime or their future.

When it came to Cowperwood's turn to be called, his honor himself
stiffened and straightened up, for this was a different type of man and
could not be handled in the usual manner. He knew exactly what he
was going to say. When one of Mollenhauer's agents, a close friend of
Butler's, had suggested that five years for both Cowperwood and Stener
would be about right, he knew exactly what to do. "Frank Algernon
Cowperwood," called the clerk.

Cowperwood stepped briskly forward, sorry for himself, ashamed of his
position in a way, but showing it neither in look nor manner. Payderson
eyed him as he had the others.

"Name?" asked the bailiff, for the benefit of the court stenographer.

"Frank Algernon Cowperwood."

"Residence?"

"1937 Girard Avenue."

"Occupation?"

"Banker and broker."

Steger stood close beside him, very dignified, very forceful, ready to
make a final statement for the benefit of the court and the public when
the time should come. Aileen, from her position in the crowd near the
door, was for the first time in her life biting her fingers nervously
and there were great beads of perspiration on her brow. Cowperwood's
father was tense with excitement and his two brothers looked quickly
away, doing their best to hide their fear and sorrow.

"Ever convicted before?"

"Never," replied Steger for Cowperwood, quietly.

"Frank Algernon Cowperwood," called the clerk, in his nasal, singsong
way, coming forward, "have you anything to say why judgment should not
now be pronounced upon you? If so, speak."

Cowperwood started to say no, but Steger put up his hand.

"If the court pleases, my client, Mr. Cowperwood, the prisoner at the
bar, is neither guilty in his own estimation, nor in that of two-fifths
of the Pennsylvania State Supreme Court--the court of last resort in
this State," he exclaimed, loudly and clearly, so that all might hear.

One of the interested listeners and spectators at this point was Edward
Malia Butler, who had just stepped in from another courtroom where he
had been talking to a judge. An obsequious court attendant had warned
him that Cowperwood was about to be sentenced. He had really come here
this morning in order not to miss this sentence, but he cloaked his
motive under the guise of another errand. He did not know that Aileen
was there, nor did he see her.

"As he himself testified at the time of his trial," went on Steger, "and
as the evidence clearly showed, he was never more than an agent for the
gentleman whose offense was subsequently adjudicated by this court;
and as an agent he still maintains, and two-fifths of the State Supreme
Court agree with him, that he was strictly within his rights and
privileges in not having deposited the sixty thousand dollars' worth of
city loan certificates at the time, and in the manner which the people,
acting through the district attorney, complained that he should have. My
client is a man of rare financial ability. By the various letters which
have been submitted to your honor in his behalf, you will see that he
commands the respect and the sympathy of a large majority of the
most forceful and eminent men in his particular world. He is a man of
distinguished social standing and of notable achievements. Only the
most unheralded and the unkindest thrust of fortune has brought him
here before you today--a fire and its consequent panic which involved a
financial property of the most thorough and stable character. In spite
of the verdict of the jury and the decision of three-fifths of the State
Supreme Court, I maintain that my client is not an embezzler, that he
has not committed larceny, that he should never have been convicted,
and that he should not now be punished for something of which he is not
guilty.

"I trust that your honor will not misunderstand me or my motives when I
point out in this situation that what I have said is true. I do not wish
to cast any reflection on the integrity of the court, nor of any court,
nor of any of the processes of law. But I do condemn and deplore the
untoward chain of events which has built up a seeming situation,
not easily understood by the lay mind, and which has brought my
distinguished client within the purview of the law. I think it is but
fair that this should be finally and publicly stated here and now. I
ask that your honor be lenient, and that if you cannot conscientiously
dismiss this charge you will at least see that the facts, as I have
indicated them, are given due weight in the measure of the punishment
inflicted."

Steger stepped back and Judge Payderson nodded, as much as to say he had
heard all the distinguished lawyer had to say, and would give it such
consideration as it deserved--no more. Then he turned to Cowperwood,
and, summoning all his judicial dignity to his aid, he began:

"Frank Algernon Cowperwood, you have been convicted by a jury of your
own selection of the offense of larceny. The motion for a new trial,
made in your behalf by your learned counsel, has been carefully
considered and overruled, the majority of the court being entirely
satisfied with the propriety of the conviction, both upon the law and
the evidence. Your offense was one of more than usual gravity, the more
so that the large amount of money which you obtained belonged to the
city. And it was aggravated by the fact that you had in addition thereto
unlawfully used and converted to your own use several hundred thousand
dollars of the loan and money of the city. For such an offense
the maximum punishment affixed by the law is singularly merciful.
Nevertheless, the facts in connection with your hitherto distinguished
position, the circumstances under which your failure was brought about,
and the appeals of your numerous friends and financial associates, will
be given due consideration by this court. It is not unmindful of any
important fact in your career." Payderson paused as if in doubt,
though he knew very well how he was about to proceed. He knew what his
superiors expected of him.

"If your case points no other moral," he went on, after a moment, toying
with the briefs, "it will at least teach the lesson much needed at the
present time, that the treasury of the city is not to be invaded
and plundered with impunity under the thin disguise of a business
transaction, and that there is still a power in the law to vindicate
itself and to protect the public.

"The sentence of the court," he added, solemnly, the while Cowperwood
gazed unmoved, "is, therefore, that you pay a fine of five thousand
dollars to the commonwealth for the use of the county, that you pay the
costs of prosecution, and that you undergo imprisonment in the
State Penitentiary for the Eastern District by separate or solitary
confinement at labor for a period of four years and three months, and
that you stand committed until this sentence is complied with."

Cowperwood's father, on hearing this, bowed his head to hide his tears.
Aileen bit her lower lip and clenched her hands to keep down her rage
and disappointment and tears. Four years and three months! That would
make a terrible gap in his life and hers. Still, she could wait. It was
better than eight or ten years, as she had feared it might be. Perhaps
now, once this was really over and he was in prison, the Governor would
pardon him.

The judge now moved to pick up the papers in connection with Stener's
case, satisfied that he had given the financiers no chance to say he had
not given due heed to their plea in Cowperwood's behalf and yet certain
that the politicians would be pleased that he had so nearly given
Cowperwood the maximum while appearing to have heeded the pleas for
mercy. Cowperwood saw through the trick at once, but it did not disturb
him. It struck him as rather weak and contemptible. A bailiff came
forward and started to hurry him away.

"Allow the prisoner to remain for a moment," called the judge.

The name, of George W. Stener had been called by the clerk and
Cowperwood did not quite understand why he was being detained, but he
soon learned. It was that he might hear the opinion of the court in
connection with his copartner in crime. The latter's record was taken.
Roger O'Mara, the Irish political lawyer who had been his counsel all
through his troubles, stood near him, but had nothing to say beyond
asking the judge to consider Stener's previously honorable career.

"George W. Stener," said his honor, while the audience, including
Cowperwood, listened attentively. "The motion for a new trial as well as
an arrest of judgment in your case having been overruled, it remains
for the court to impose such sentence as the nature of your offense
requires. I do not desire to add to the pain of your position by any
extended remarks of my own; but I cannot let the occasion pass without
expressing my emphatic condemnation of your offense. The misapplication
of public money has become the great crime of the age. If not promptly
and firmly checked, it will ultimately destroy our institutions. When
a republic becomes honeycombed with corruption its vitality is gone. It
must crumble upon the first pressure.

"In my opinion, the public is much to blame for your offense and others
of a similar character. Heretofore, official fraud has been regarded
with too much indifference. What we need is a higher and purer political
morality--a state of public opinion which would make the improper use of
public money a thing to be execrated. It was the lack of this which made
your offense possible. Beyond that I see nothing of extenuation in your
case." Judge Payderson paused for emphasis. He was coming to his finest
flight, and he wanted it to sink in.

"The people had confided to you the care of their money," he went on,
solemnly. "It was a high, a sacred trust. You should have guarded the
door of the treasury even as the cherubim protected the Garden of Eden,
and should have turned the flaming sword of impeccable honesty
against every one who approached it improperly. Your position as the
representative of a great community warranted that.

"In view of all the facts in your case the court can do no less than
impose a major penalty. The seventy-fourth section of the Criminal
Procedure Act provides that no convict shall be sentenced by the court
of this commonwealth to either of the penitentiaries thereof, for
any term which shall expire between the fifteenth of November and the
fifteenth day of February of any year, and this provision requires me to
abate three months from the maximum of time which I would affix in your
case--namely, five years. The sentence of the court is, therefore, that
you pay a fine of five thousand dollars to the commonwealth for the use
of the county"--Payderson knew well enough that Stener could never pay
that sum--"and that you undergo imprisonment in the State Penitentiary
for the Eastern District, by separate and solitary confinement at
labor, for the period of four years and nine months, and that you stand
committed until this sentence is complied with." He laid down the briefs
and rubbed his chin reflectively while both Cowperwood and Stener were
hurried out. Butler was the first to leave after the sentence--quite
satisfied. Seeing that all was over so far as she was concerned, Aileen
stole quickly out; and after her, in a few moments, Cowperwood's father
and brothers. They were to await him outside and go with him to the
penitentiary. The remaining members of the family were at home eagerly
awaiting intelligence of the morning's work, and Joseph Cowperwood was
at once despatched to tell them.

The day had now become cloudy, lowery, and it looked as if there might
be snow. Eddie Zanders, who had been given all the papers in the case,
announced that there was no need to return to the county jail. In
consequence the five of them--Zanders, Steger, Cowperwood, his father,
and Edward--got into a street-car which ran to within a few blocks of
the prison. Within half an hour they were at the gates of the Eastern
Penitentiary.




