

The Eastern District Penitentiary of Pennsylvania, standing at Fairmount
Avenue and Twenty-first Street in Philadelphia, where Cowperwood was
now to serve his sentence of four years and three months, was a large,
gray-stone structure, solemn and momentous in its mien, not at all
unlike the palace of Sforzas at Milan, although not so distinguished.
It stretched its gray length for several blocks along four different
streets, and looked as lonely and forbidding as a prison should. The
wall which inclosed its great area extending over ten acres and gave it
so much of its solemn dignity was thirty-five feet high and some seven
feet thick. The prison proper, which was not visible from the outside,
consisted of seven arms or corridors, ranged octopus-like around a
central room or court, and occupying in their sprawling length about
two-thirds of the yard inclosed within the walls, so that there was but
little space for the charm of lawn or sward. The corridors, forty-two
feet wide from outer wall to outer wall, were one hundred and eighty
feet in length, and in four instances two stories high, and extended
in their long reach in every direction. There were no windows in the
corridors, only narrow slits of skylights, three and one-half feet long
by perhaps eight inches wide, let in the roof; and the ground-floor
cells were accompanied in some instances by a small yard ten by
sixteen--the same size as the cells proper--which was surrounded by a
high brick wall in every instance. The cells and floors and roofs were
made of stone, and the corridors, which were only ten feet wide between
the cells, and in the case of the single-story portion only fifteen
feet high, were paved with stone. If you stood in the central room, or
rotunda, and looked down the long stretches which departed from you
in every direction, you had a sense of narrowness and confinement
not compatible with their length. The iron doors, with their outer
accompaniment of solid wooden ones, the latter used at times to shut the
prisoner from all sight and sound, were grim and unpleasing to behold.
The halls were light enough, being whitewashed frequently and set with
the narrow skylights, which were closed with frosted glass in winter;
but they were, as are all such matter-of-fact arrangements for
incarceration, bare--wearisome to look upon. Life enough there was in
all conscience, seeing that there were four hundred prisoners here at
that time, and that nearly every cell was occupied; but it was a life of
which no one individual was essentially aware as a spectacle. He was of
it; but he was not. Some of the prisoners, after long service, were used
as "trusties" or "runners," as they were locally called; but not many.
There was a bakery, a machine-shop, a carpenter-shop, a store-room,
a flour-mill, and a series of gardens, or truck patches; but the
manipulation of these did not require the services of a large number.

The prison proper dated from 1822, and it had grown, wing by wing, until
its present considerable size had been reached. Its population consisted
of individuals of all degrees of intelligence and crime, from murderers
to minor practitioners of larceny. It had what was known as the
"Pennsylvania System" of regulation for its inmates, which was nothing
more nor less than solitary confinement for all concerned--a life of
absolute silence and separate labor in separate cells.

Barring his comparatively recent experience in the county jail, which
after all was far from typical, Cowperwood had never been in a prison in
his life. Once, when a boy, in one of his perambulations through several
of the surrounding towns, he had passed a village "lock-up," as the
town prisons were then called--a small, square, gray building with long
iron-barred windows, and he had seen, at one of these rather depressing
apertures on the second floor, a none too prepossessing drunkard or town
ne'er-do-well who looked down on him with bleary eyes, unkempt hair, and
a sodden, waxy, pallid face, and called--for it was summer and the jail
window was open:

"Hey, sonny, get me a plug of tobacco, will you?"

Cowperwood, who had looked up, shocked and disturbed by the man's
disheveled appearance, had called back, quite without stopping to think:

"Naw, I can't."

"Look out you don't get locked up yourself sometime, you little runt,"
the man had replied, savagely, only half recovered from his debauch of
the day before.

He had not thought of this particular scene in years, but now suddenly
it came back to him. Here he was on his way to be locked up in this
dull, somber prison, and it was snowing, and he was being cut out of
human affairs as much as it was possible for him to be cut out.

No friends were permitted to accompany him beyond the outer gate--not
even Steger for the time being, though he might visit him later in
the day. This was an inviolable rule. Zanders being known to the
gate-keeper, and bearing his commitment paper, was admitted at once. The
others turned solemnly away. They bade a gloomy if affectionate farewell
to Cowperwood, who, on his part, attempted to give it all an air of
inconsequence--as, in part and even here, it had for him.

"Well, good-by for the present," he said, shaking hands. "I'll be all
right and I'll get out soon. Wait and see. Tell Lillian not to worry."

He stepped inside, and the gate clanked solemnly behind him. Zanders led
the way through a dark, somber hall, wide and high-ceiled, to a farther
gate, where a second gateman, trifling with a large key, unlocked a
barred door at his bidding. Once inside the prison yard, Zanders turned
to the left into a small office, presenting his prisoner before a small,
chest-high desk, where stood a prison officer in uniform of blue.
The latter, the receiving overseer of the prison--a thin, practical,
executive-looking person with narrow gray eyes and light hair, took the
paper which the sheriff's deputy handed him and read it. This was his
authority for receiving Cowperwood. In his turn he handed Zanders a
slip, showing that he had so received the prisoner; and then Zanders
left, receiving gratefully the tip which Cowperwood pressed in his hand.

"Well, good-by, Mr. Cowperwood," he said, with a peculiar twist of his
detective-like head. "I'm sorry. I hope you won't find it so bad here."

He wanted to impress the receiving overseer with his familiarity with
this distinguished prisoner, and Cowperwood, true to his policy of
make-believe, shook hands with him cordially.

"I'm much obliged to you for your courtesy, Mr. Zanders," he said, then
turned to his new master with the air of a man who is determined to make
a good impression. He was now in the hands of petty officials, he knew,
who could modify or increase his comfort at will. He wanted to impress
this man with his utter willingness to comply and obey--his sense of
respect for his authority--without in any way demeaning himself. He
was depressed but efficient, even here in the clutch of that eventual
machine of the law, the State penitentiary, which he had been struggling
so hard to evade.

The receiving overseer, Roger Kendall, though thin and clerical, was
a rather capable man, as prison officials go--shrewd, not particularly
well educated, not over-intelligent naturally, not over-industrious,
but sufficiently energetic to hold his position. He knew something about
convicts--considerable--for he had been dealing with them for nearly
twenty-six years. His attitude toward them was cold, cynical, critical.

He did not permit any of them to come into personal contact with
him, but he saw to it that underlings in his presence carried out the
requirements of the law.

When Cowperwood entered, dressed in his very good clothing--a dark
gray-blue twill suit of pure wool, a light, well-made gray overcoat, a
black derby hat of the latest shape, his shoes new and of good leather,
his tie of the best silk, heavy and conservatively colored, his hair and
mustache showing the attention of an intelligent barber, and his hands
well manicured--the receiving overseer saw at once that he was in the
presence of some one of superior intelligence and force, such a man as
the fortune of his trade rarely brought into his net.

Cowperwood stood in the middle of the room without apparently looking at
any one or anything, though he saw all. "Convict number 3633," Kendall
called to a clerk, handing him at the same time a yellow slip of paper
on which was written Cowperwood's full name and his record number,
counting from the beginning of the penitentiary itself.

The underling, a convict, took it and entered it in a book, reserving
the slip at the same time for the penitentiary "runner" or "trusty," who
would eventually take Cowperwood to the "manners" gallery.

"You will have to take off your clothes and take a bath," said Kendall
to Cowperwood, eyeing him curiously. "I don't suppose you need one, but
it's the rule."

"Thank you," replied Cowperwood, pleased that his personality was
counting for something even here. "Whatever the rules are, I want to
obey."

When he started to take off his coat, however, Kendall put up his hand
delayingly and tapped a bell. There now issued from an adjoining room
an assistant, a prison servitor, a weird-looking specimen of the genus
"trusty." He was a small, dark, lopsided individual, one leg being
slightly shorter, and therefore one shoulder lower, than the other. He
was hollow-chested, squint-eyed, and rather shambling, but spry enough
withal. He was dressed in a thin, poorly made, baggy suit of striped
jeans, the prison stripes of the place, showing a soft roll-collar shirt
underneath, and wearing a large, wide-striped cap, peculiarly offensive
in its size and shape to Cowperwood. He could not help thinking how
uncanny the man's squint eyes looked under its straight outstanding
visor. The trusty had a silly, sycophantic manner of raising one hand
in salute. He was a professional "second-story man," "up" for ten years,
but by dint of good behavior he had attained to the honor of working
about this office without the degrading hood customary for prisoners to
wear over the cap. For this he was properly grateful. He now considered
his superior with nervous dog-like eyes, and looked at Cowperwood with a
certain cunning appreciation of his lot and a show of initial mistrust.

One prisoner is as good as another to the average convict; as a matter
of fact, it is their only consolation in their degradation that all who
come here are no better than they. The world may have misused them; but
they misuse their confreres in their thoughts. The "holier than thou"
attitude, intentional or otherwise, is quite the last and most deadly
offense within prison walls. This particular "trusty" could no more
understand Cowperwood than could a fly the motions of a fly-wheel; but
with the cocky superiority of the underling of the world he did not
hesitate to think that he could. A crook was a crook to him--Cowperwood
no less than the shabbiest pickpocket. His one feeling was that he would
like to demean him, to pull him down to his own level.

"You will have to take everything you have out of your pockets," Kendall
now informed Cowperwood. Ordinarily he would have said, "Search the
prisoner."

Cowperwood stepped forward and laid out a purse with twenty-five dollars
in it, a pen-knife, a lead-pencil, a small note-book, and a little
ivory elephant which Aileen had given him once, "for luck," and which
he treasured solely because she gave it to him. Kendall looked at
the latter curiously. "Now you can go on," he said to the "trusty,"
referring to the undressing and bathing process which was to follow.

"This way," said the latter, addressing Cowperwood, and preceding him
into an adjoining room, where three closets held three old-fashioned,
iron-bodied, wooden-top bath-tubs, with their attendant shelves for
rough crash towels, yellow soap, and the like, and hooks for clothes.

"Get in there," said the trusty, whose name was Thomas Kuby, pointing to
one of the tubs.

Cowperwood realized that this was the beginning of petty official
supervision; but he deemed it wise to appear friendly even here.

"I see," he said. "I will."

"That's right," replied the attendant, somewhat placated. "What did you
bring?"

Cowperwood looked at him quizzically. He did not understand. The prison
attendant realized that this man did not know the lingo of the place.
"What did you bring?" he repeated. "How many years did you get?"

"Oh!" exclaimed Cowperwood, comprehendingly. "I understand. Four and
three months."

He decided to humor the man. It would probably be better so.

"What for?" inquired Kuby, familiarly.

Cowperwood's blood chilled slightly. "Larceny," he said.

"Yuh got off easy," commented Kuby. "I'm up for ten. A rube judge did
that to me."

Kuby had never heard of Cowperwood's crime. He would not have understood
its subtleties if he had. Cowperwood did not want to talk to this
man; he did not know how. He wished he would go away; but that was not
likely. He wanted to be put in his cell and let alone.

"That's too bad," he answered; and the convict realized clearly that
this man was really not one of them, or he would not have said anything
like that. Kuby went to the two hydrants opening into the bath-tub and
turned them on. Cowperwood had been undressing the while, and now stood
naked, but not ashamed, in front of this eighth-rate intelligence.

"Don't forget to wash your head, too," said Kuby, and went away.

Cowperwood stood there while the water ran, meditating on his fate. It
was strange how life had dealt with him of late--so severely. Unlike
most men in his position, he was not suffering from a consciousness
of evil. He did not think he was evil. As he saw it, he was merely
unfortunate. To think that he should be actually in this great, silent
penitentiary, a convict, waiting here beside this cheap iron bathtub,
not very sweet or hygienic to contemplate, with this crackbrained
criminal to watch over him!

He stepped into the tub and washed himself briskly with the biting
yellow soap, drying himself on one of the rough, only partially bleached
towels. He looked for his underwear, but there was none. At this point
the attendant looked in again. "Out here," he said, inconsiderately.

Cowperwood followed, naked. He was led through the receiving overseer's
office into a room, where were scales, implements of measurement, a
record-book, etc. The attendant who stood guard at the door now came
over, and the clerk who sat in a corner automatically took down a
record-blank. Kendall surveyed Cowperwood's decidedly graceful figure,
already inclining to a slight thickening around the waist, and approved
of it as superior to that of most who came here. His skin, as he
particularly noted, was especially white.

"Step on the scale," said the attendant, brusquely.

Cowperwood did so, The former adjusted the weights and scanned the
record carefully.

"Weight, one hundred and seventy-five," he called. "Now step over here."

He indicated a spot in the side wall where was fastened in a thin
slat--which ran from the floor to about seven and one half feet above,
perpendicularly--a small movable wooden indicator, which, when a man was
standing under it, could be pressed down on his head. At the side of
the slat were the total inches of height, laid off in halves, quarters,
eighths, and so on, and to the right a length measurement for the arm.
Cowperwood understood what was wanted and stepped under the indicator,
standing quite straight.

"Feet level, back to the wall," urged the attendant. "So. Height, five
feet nine and ten-sixteenths," he called. The clerk in the corner noted
it. He now produced a tape-measure and began measuring Cowperwood's
arms, legs, chest, waist, hips, etc. He called out the color of his
eyes, his hair, his mustache, and, looking into his mouth, exclaimed,
"Teeth, all sound."

After Cowperwood had once more given his address, age, profession,
whether he knew any trade, etc.--which he did not--he was allowed
to return to the bathroom, and put on the clothing which the prison
provided for him--first the rough, prickly underwear, then the cheap
soft roll-collar, white-cotton shirt, then the thick bluish-gray cotton
socks of a quality such as he had never worn in his life, and over these
a pair of indescribable rough-leather clogs, which felt to his feet as
though they were made of wood or iron--oily and heavy. He then drew on
the shapeless, baggy trousers with their telltale stripes, and over his
arms and chest the loose-cut shapeless coat and waistcoat. He felt and
knew of course that he looked very strange, wretched. And as he stepped
out into the overseer's room again he experienced a peculiar sense of
depression, a gone feeling which before this had not assailed him and
which now he did his best to conceal. This, then, was what society did
to the criminal, he thought to himself. It took him and tore away from
his body and his life the habiliments of his proper state and left him
these. He felt sad and grim, and, try as he would--he could not help
showing it for a moment. It was always his business and his intention
to conceal his real feelings, but now it was not quite possible. He felt
degraded, impossible, in these clothes, and he knew that he looked
it. Nevertheless, he did his best to pull himself together and look
unconcerned, willing, obedient, considerate of those above him. After
all, he said to himself, it was all a play of sorts, a dream even, if
one chose to view it so, a miasma even, from which, in the course of
time and with a little luck one might emerge safely enough. He hoped so.
It could not last. He was only acting a strange, unfamiliar part on the
stage, this stage of life that he knew so well.

Kendall did not waste any time looking at him, however. He merely said
to his assistant, "See if you can find a cap for him," and the latter,
going to a closet containing numbered shelves, took down a cap--a
high-crowned, straight-visored, shabby, striped affair which Cowperwood
was asked to try on. It fitted well enough, slipping down close over his
ears, and he thought that now his indignities must be about complete.
What could be added? There could be no more of these disconcerting
accoutrements. But he was mistaken. "Now, Kuby, you take him to Mr.
Chapin," said Kendall.

Kuby understood. He went back into the wash-room and produced what
Cowperwood had heard of but never before seen--a blue-and-white-striped
cotton bag about half the length of an ordinary pillow-case and half
again as wide, which Kuby now unfolded and shook out as he came toward
him. It was a custom. The use of this hood, dating from the earliest
days of the prison, was intended to prevent a sense of location and
direction and thereby obviate any attempt to escape. Thereafter during
all his stay he was not supposed to walk with or talk to or see another
prisoner--not even to converse with his superiors, unless addressed. It
was a grim theory, and yet one definitely enforced here, although as he
was to learn later even this could be modified here.

"You'll have to put this on," Kuby said, and opened it in such a way
that it could be put over Cowperwood's head.

Cowperwood understood. He had heard of it in some way, in times past. He
was a little shocked--looked at it first with a touch of real surprise,
but a moment after lifted his hands and helped pull it down.

"Never mind," cautioned the guard, "put your hands down. I'll get it
over."

Cowperwood dropped his arms. When it was fully on, it came to about his
chest, giving him little means of seeing anything. He felt very strange,
very humiliated, very downcast. This simple thing of a blue-and-white
striped bag over his head almost cost him his sense of self-possession.
Why could not they have spared him this last indignity, he thought?

"This way," said his attendant, and he was led out to where he could not
say.

"If you hold it out in front you can see to walk," said his guide; and
Cowperwood pulled it out, thus being able to discern his feet and a
portion of the floor below. He was thus conducted--seeing nothing in his
transit--down a short walk, then through a long corridor, then through a
room of uniformed guards, and finally up a narrow flight of iron steps,
leading to the overseer's office on the second floor of one of the
two-tier blocks. There, he heard the voice of Kuby saying: "Mr. Chapin,
here's another prisoner for you from Mr. Kendall."

"I'll be there in a minute," came a peculiarly pleasant voice from the
distance. Presently a big, heavy hand closed about his arm, and he was
conducted still further.

"You hain't got far to go now," the voice said, "and then I'll take
that bag off," and Cowperwood felt for some reason a sense of sympathy,
perhaps--as though he would choke. The further steps were not many.

A cell door was reached and unlocked by the inserting of a great iron
key. It was swung open, and the same big hand guided him through. A
moment later the bag was pulled easily from his head, and he saw that he
was in a narrow, whitewashed cell, rather dim, windowless, but lighted
from the top by a small skylight of frosted glass three and one half
feet long by four inches wide. For a night light there was a tin-bodied
lamp swinging from a hook near the middle of one of the side walls. A
rough iron cot, furnished with a straw mattress and two pairs of dark
blue, probably unwashed blankets, stood in one corner. There was a
hydrant and small sink in another. A small shelf occupied the wall
opposite the bed. A plain wooden chair with a homely round back stood at
the foot of the bed, and a fairly serviceable broom was standing in one
corner. There was an iron stool or pot for excreta, giving, as he could
see, into a large drain-pipe which ran along the inside wall, and which
was obviously flushed by buckets of water being poured into it. Rats
and other vermin infested this, and it gave off an unpleasant odor which
filled the cell. The floor was of stone. Cowperwood's clear-seeing
eyes took it all in at a glance. He noted the hard cell door, which was
barred and cross-barred with great round rods of steel, and fastened
with a thick, highly polished lock. He saw also that beyond this was a
heavy wooden door, which could shut him in even more completely than the
iron one. There was no chance for any clear, purifying sunlight here.
Cleanliness depended entirely on whitewash, soap and water and sweeping,
which in turn depended on the prisoners themselves.

He also took in Chapin, the homely, good-natured, cell overseer whom he
now saw for the first time--a large, heavy, lumbering man, rather dusty
and misshapen-looking, whose uniform did not fit him well, and whose
manner of standing made him look as though he would much prefer to sit
down. He was obviously bulky, but not strong, and his kindly face was
covered with a short growth of grayish-brown whiskers. His hair was cut
badly and stuck out in odd strings or wisps from underneath his big cap.
Nevertheless, Cowperwood was not at all unfavorably impressed--quite the
contrary--and he felt at once that this man might be more considerate of
him than the others had been. He hoped so, anyhow. He did not know that
he was in the presence of the overseer of the "manners squad," who would
have him in charge for two weeks only, instructing him in the rules of
the prison, and that he was only one of twenty-six, all told, who were
in Chapin's care.

That worthy, by way of easy introduction, now went over to the bed
and seated himself on it. He pointed to the hard wooden chair, which
Cowperwood drew out and sat on.

"Well, now you're here, hain't yuh?" he asked, and answered himself
quite genially, for he was an unlettered man, generously disposed, of
long experience with criminals, and inclined to deal kindly with kindly
temperament and a form of religious belief--Quakerism--had inclined him
to be merciful, and yet his official duties, as Cowperwood later found
out, seemed to have led him to the conclusion that most criminals
were innately bad. Like Kendall, he regarded them as weaklings and
ne'er-do-wells with evil streaks in them, and in the main he was not
mistaken. Yet he could not help being what he was, a fatherly, kindly
old man, having faith in those shibboleths of the weak and inexperienced
mentally--human justice and human decency.

"Yes, I'm here, Mr. Chapin," Cowperwood replied, simply, remembering his
name from the attendant, and flattering the keeper by the use of it.

To old Chapin the situation was more or less puzzling. This was the
famous Frank A. Cowperwood whom he had read about, the noted banker and
treasury-looter. He and his co-partner in crime, Stener, were destined
to serve, as he had read, comparatively long terms here. Five hundred
thousand dollars was a large sum of money in those days, much more
than five million would have been forty years later. He was awed by the
thought of what had become of it--how Cowperwood managed to do all
the things the papers had said he had done. He had a little formula of
questions which he usually went through with each new prisoner--asking
him if he was sorry now for the crime he had committed, if he meant to
do better with a new chance, if his father and mother were alive,
etc.; and by the manner in which they answered these questions--simply,
regretfully, defiantly, or otherwise--he judged whether they were being
adequately punished or not. Yet he could not talk to Cowperwood as
he now saw or as he would to the average second-story burglar,
store-looter, pickpocket, and plain cheap thief and swindler. And yet he
scarcely knew how else to talk.

"Well, now," he went on, "I don't suppose you ever thought you'd get to
a place like this, did you, Mr. Cowperwood?"

"I never did," replied Frank, simply. "I wouldn't have believed it a few
months ago, Mr. Chapin. I don't think I deserve to be here now, though
of course there is no use of my telling you that."

He saw that old Chapin wanted to moralize a little, and he was only too
glad to fall in with his mood. He would soon be alone with no one to
talk to perhaps, and if a sympathetic understanding could be reached
with this man now, so much the better. Any port in a storm; any straw to
a drowning man.

"Well, no doubt all of us makes mistakes," continued Mr. Chapin,
superiorly, with an amusing faith in his own value as a moral guide and
reformer. "We can't just always tell how the plans we think so fine are
coming out, can we? You're here now, an' I suppose you're sorry certain
things didn't come out just as you thought; but if you had a chance I
don't suppose you'd try to do just as you did before, now would yuh?"

"No, Mr. Chapin, I wouldn't, exactly," said Cowperwood, truly enough,
"though I believed I was right in everything I did. I don't think legal
justice has really been done me."

"Well, that's the way," continued Chapin, meditatively, scratching his
grizzled head and looking genially about. "Sometimes, as I allers says
to some of these here young fellers that comes in here, we don't know as
much as we thinks we does. We forget that others are just as smart as we
are, and that there are allers people that are watchin' us all the time.
These here courts and jails and detectives--they're here all the time,
and they get us. I gad"--Chapin's moral version of "by God"--"they do,
if we don't behave."

"Yes," Cowperwood replied, "that's true enough, Mr. Chapin."

"Well," continued the old man after a time, after he had made a few more
solemn, owl-like, and yet well-intentioned remarks, "now here's your
bed, and there's your chair, and there's your wash-stand, and there's
your water-closet. Now keep 'em all clean and use 'em right." (You would
have thought he was making Cowperwood a present of a fortune.) "You're
the one's got to make up your bed every mornin' and keep your floor
swept and your toilet flushed and your cell clean. There hain't anybody
here'll do that for yuh. You want to do all them things the first thing
in the mornin' when you get up, and afterward you'll get sumpin' to eat,
about six-thirty. You're supposed to get up at five-thirty."

"Yes, Mr. Chapin," Cowperwood said, politely. "You can depend on me to
do all those things promptly."

"There hain't so much more," added Chapin. "You're supposed to wash
yourself all over once a week an' I'll give you a clean towel for that.
Next you gotta wash this floor up every Friday mornin'." Cowperwood
winced at that. "You kin have hot water for that if you want it. I'll
have one of the runners bring it to you. An' as for your friends and
relations"--he got up and shook himself like a big Newfoundland dog.
"You gotta wife, hain't you?"

"Yes," replied Cowperwood.

"Well, the rules here are that your wife or your friends kin come to see
you once in three months, and your lawyer--you gotta lawyer hain't yuh?"

"Yes, sir," replied Cowperwood, amused.

"Well, he kin come every week or so if he likes--every day, I
guess--there hain't no rules about lawyers. But you kin only write one
letter once in three months yourself, an' if you want anything like
tobaccer or the like o' that, from the store-room, you gotta sign an
order for it, if you got any money with the warden, an' then I can git
it for you."

The old man was really above taking small tips in the shape of money.
He was a hold-over from a much more severe and honest regime, but
subsequent presents or constant flattery were not amiss in making him
kindly and generous. Cowperwood read him accurately.

"Very well, Mr. Chapin; I understand," he said, getting up as the old
man did.

"Then when you have been here two weeks," added Chapin, rather
ruminatively (he had forgot to state this to Cowperwood before), "the
warden 'll come and git yuh and give yuh yer regular cell summers
down-stairs. Yuh kin make up yer mind by that time what y'u'd like tuh
do, what y'u'd like to work at. If you behave yourself proper, more'n
like they'll give yuh a cell with a yard. Yuh never can tell."

He went out, locking the door with a solemn click; and Cowperwood stood
there, a little more depressed than he had been, because of this latest
intelligence. Only two weeks, and then he would be transferred from this
kindly old man's care to another's, whom he did not know and with whom
he might not fare so well.

"If ever you want me for anything--if ye're sick or sumpin' like that,"
Chapin now returned to say, after he had walked a few paces away, "we
have a signal here of our own. Just hang your towel out through these
here bars. I'll see it, and I'll stop and find out what yuh want, when
I'm passin'."

Cowperwood, whose spirits had sunk, revived for the moment.

"Yes, sir," he replied; "thank you, Mr. Chapin."

The old man walked away, and Cowperwood heard his steps dying down
the cement-paved hall. He stood and listened, his ears being greeted
occasionally by a distant cough, a faint scraping of some one's feet,
the hum or whir of a machine, or the iron scratch of a key in a lock.
None of the noises was loud. Rather they were all faint and far away.
He went over and looked at the bed, which was not very clean and without
linen, and anything but wide or soft, and felt it curiously. So here
was where he was to sleep from now on--he who so craved and appreciated
luxury and refinement. If Aileen or some of his rich friends should see
him here. Worse, he was sickened by the thought of possible vermin.
How could he tell? How would he do? The one chair was abominable. The
skylight was weak. He tried to think of himself as becoming accustomed
to the situation, but he re-discovered the offal pot in one corner, and
that discouraged him. It was possible that rats might come up here--it
looked that way. No pictures, no books, no scene, no person, no space to
walk--just the four bare walls and silence, which he would be shut into
at night by the thick door. What a horrible fate!

He sat down and contemplated his situation. So here he was at last in
the Eastern Penitentiary, and doomed, according to the judgment of the
politicians (Butler among others), to remain here four long years and
longer. Stener, it suddenly occurred to him, was probably being put
through the same process he had just gone through. Poor old Stener!
What a fool he had made of himself. But because of his foolishness he
deserved all he was now getting. But the difference between himself and
Stener was that they would let Stener out. It was possible that already
they were easing his punishment in some way that he, Cowperwood, did not
know. He put his hand to his chin, thinking--his business, his house,
his friends, his family, Aileen. He felt for his watch, but remembered
that they had taken that. There was no way of telling the time. Neither
had he any notebook, pen, or pencil with which to amuse or interest
himself. Besides he had had nothing to eat since morning. Still, that
mattered little. What did matter was that he was shut up here away from
the world, quite alone, quite lonely, without knowing what time it
was, and that he could not attend to any of the things he ought to
be attending to--his business affairs, his future. True, Steger would
probably come to see him after a while. That would help a little. But
even so--think of his position, his prospects up to the day of the fire
and his state now. He sat looking at his shoes; his suit. God! He got
up and walked to and fro, to and fro, but his own steps and movements
sounded so loud. He walked to the cell door and looked out through the
thick bars, but there was nothing to see--nothing save a portion of two
cell doors opposite, something like his own. He came back and sat in his
single chair, meditating, but, getting weary of that finally, stretched
himself on the dirty prison bed to try it. It was not uncomfortable
entirely. He got up after a while, however, and sat, then walked,
then sat. What a narrow place to walk, he thought. This was
horrible--something like a living tomb. And to think he should be here
now, day after day and day after day, until--until what? Until
the Governor pardoned him or his time was up, or his fortune eaten
away--or--

So he cogitated while the hours slipped by. It was nearly five o'clock
before Steger was able to return, and then only for a little while.
He had been arranging for Cowperwood's appearance on the following
Thursday, Friday, and Monday in his several court proceedings. When he
was gone, however, and the night fell and Cowperwood had to trim his
little, shabby oil-lamp and to drink the strong tea and eat the rough,
poor bread made of bran and white flour, which was shoved to him
through the small aperture in the door by the trencher trusty, who was
accompanied by the overseer to see that it was done properly, he really
felt very badly. And after that the center wooden door of his cell was
presently closed and locked by a trusty who slammed it rudely and said
no word. Nine o'clock would be sounded somewhere by a great bell, he
understood, when his smoky oil-lamp would have to be put out promptly
and he would have to undress and go to bed. There were punishments,
no doubt, for infractions of these rules--reduced rations, the
strait-jacket, perhaps stripes--he scarcely knew what. He felt
disconsolate, grim, weary. He had put up such a long, unsatisfactory
fight. After washing his heavy stone cup and tin plate at the hydrant,
he took off the sickening uniform and shoes and even the drawers of
the scratching underwear, and stretched himself wearily on the bed. The
place was not any too warm, and he tried to make himself comfortable
between the blankets--but it was of little use. His soul was cold.

"This will never do," he said to himself. "This will never do. I'm not
sure whether I can stand much of this or not." Still he turned his face
to the wall, and after several hours sleep eventually came.




