

In the meanwhile Cowperwood had been transferred to a new overseer and a
new cell in Block 3 on the ground door, which was like all the others
in size, ten by sixteen, but to which was attached the small yard
previously mentioned. Warden Desmas came up two days before he was
transferred, and had another short conversation with him through his
cell door.

"You'll be transferred on Monday," he said, in his reserved, slow way.
"They'll give you a yard, though it won't be much good to you--we
only allow a half-hour a day in it. I've told the overseer about your
business arrangements. He'll treat you right in that matter. Just be
careful not to take up too much time that way, and things will work out.
I've decided to let you learn caning chairs. That'll be the best for
you. It's easy, and it'll occupy your mind."

The warden and some allied politicians made a good thing out of this
prison industry. It was really not hard labor--the tasks set were simple
and not oppressive, but all of the products were promptly sold, and
the profits pocketed. It was good, therefore, to see all the prisoners
working, and it did them good. Cowperwood was glad of the chance to
do something, for he really did not care so much for books, and his
connection with Wingate and his old affairs were not sufficient to
employ his mind in a satisfactory way. At the same time, he could not
help thinking, if he seemed strange to himself, now, how much stranger
he would seem then, behind these narrow bars working at so commonplace a
task as caning chairs. Nevertheless, he now thanked Desmas for this,
as well as for the sheets and the toilet articles which had just been
brought in.

"That's all right," replied the latter, pleasantly and softly, by now
much intrigued by Cowperwood. "I know that there are men and men here,
the same as anywhere. If a man knows how to use these things and wants
to be clean, I wouldn't be one to put anything in his way."

The new overseer with whom Cowperwood had to deal was a very different
person from Elias Chapin. His name was Walter Bonhag, and he was not
more than thirty-seven years of age--a big, flabby sort of person with a
crafty mind, whose principal object in life was to see that this prison
situation as he found it should furnish him a better income than his
normal salary provided. A close study of Bonhag would have seemed to
indicate that he was a stool-pigeon of Desmas, but this was really not
true except in a limited way. Because Bonhag was shrewd and
sycophantic, quick to see a point in his or anybody else's favor, Desmas
instinctively realized that he was the kind of man who could be trusted
to be lenient on order or suggestion. That is, if Desmas had the least
interest in a prisoner he need scarcely say so much to Bonhag; he might
merely suggest that this man was used to a different kind of life, or
that, because of some past experience, it might go hard with him if he
were handled roughly; and Bonhag would strain himself to be pleasant.
The trouble was that to a shrewd man of any refinement his attentions
were objectionable, being obviously offered for a purpose, and to a poor
or ignorant man they were brutal and contemptuous. He had built up an
extra income for himself inside the prison by selling the prisoners
extra allowances of things which he secretly brought into the prison. It
was strictly against the rules, in theory at least, to bring in anything
which was not sold in the store-room--tobacco, writing paper, pens,
ink, whisky, cigars, or delicacies of any kind. On the other hand, and
excellently well for him, it was true that tobacco of an inferior
grade was provided, as well as wretched pens, ink and paper, so that no
self-respecting man, if he could help it, would endure them. Whisky
was not allowed at all, and delicacies were abhorred as indicating rank
favoritism; nevertheless, they were brought in. If a prisoner had the
money and was willing to see that Bonhag secured something for his
trouble, almost anything would be forthcoming. Also the privilege of
being sent into the general yard as a "trusty," or being allowed to stay
in the little private yard which some cells possessed, longer than the
half-hour ordinarily permitted, was sold.

One of the things curiously enough at this time, which worked in
Cowperwood's favor, was the fact that Bonhag was friendly with the
overseer who had Stener in charge, and Stener, because of his political
friends, was being liberally treated, and Bonhag knew of this. He was
not a careful reader of newspapers, nor had he any intellectual grasp
of important events; but he knew by now that both Stener and Cowperwood
were, or had been, individuals of great importance in the community;
also that Cowperwood had been the more important of the two. Better yet,
as Bonhag now heard, Cowperwood still had money. Some prisoner, who was
permitted to read the paper, told him so. And so, entirely aside
from Warden Desmas's recommendation, which was given in a very quiet,
noncommittal way, Bonhag was interested to see what he could do for
Cowperwood for a price.

The day Cowperwood was installed in his new cell, Bonhag lolled up to
the door, which was open, and said, in a semi-patronizing way, "Got
all your things over yet?" It was his business to lock the door once
Cowperwood was inside it.

"Yes, sir," replied Cowperwood, who had been shrewd enough to get the
new overseer's name from Chapin; "this is Mr. Bonhag, I presume?"

"That's me," replied Bonhag, not a little flattered by the recognition,
but still purely interested by the practical side of this encounter. He
was anxious to study Cowperwood, to see what type of man he was.

"You'll find it a little different down here from up there," observed
Bonhag. "It ain't so stuffy. These doors out in the yards make a
difference."

"Oh, yes," said Cowperwood, observantly and shrewdly, "that is the yard
Mr. Desmas spoke of."

At the mention of the magic name, if Bonhag had been a horse, his ears
would have been seen to lift. For, of course, if Cowperwood was so
friendly with Desmas that the latter had described to him the type of
cell he was to have beforehand, it behooved Bonhag to be especially
careful.

"Yes, that's it, but it ain't much," he observed. "They only allow a
half-hour a day in it. Still it would be all right if a person could
stay out there longer."

This was his first hint at graft, favoritism; and Cowperwood distinctly
caught the sound of it in his voice.

"That's too bad," he said. "I don't suppose good conduct helps a person
to get more." He waited to hear a reply, but instead Bonhag continued
with: "I'd better teach you your new trade now. You've got to learn to
cane chairs, so the warden says. If you want, we can begin right away."
But without waiting for Cowperwood to acquiesce, he went off, returning
after a time with three unvarnished frames of chairs and a bundle
of cane strips or withes, which he deposited on the floor. Having so
done--and with a flourish--he now continued: "Now I'll show you if
you'll watch me," and he began showing Cowperwood how the strips were
to be laced through the apertures on either side, cut, and fastened
with little hickory pegs. This done, he brought a forcing awl, a small
hammer, a box of pegs, and a pair of clippers. After several brief
demonstrations with different strips, as to how the geometric forms were
designed, he allowed Cowperwood to take the matter in hand, watching
over his shoulder. The financier, quick at anything, manual or mental,
went at it in his customary energetic fashion, and in five minutes
demonstrated to Bonhag that, barring skill and speed, which could only
come with practice, he could do it as well as another. "You'll make out
all right," said Bonhag. "You're supposed to do ten of those a day. We
won't count the next few days, though, until you get your hand in. After
that I'll come around and see how you're getting along. You understand
about the towel on the door, don't you?" he inquired.

"Yes, Mr. Chapin explained that to me," replied Cowperwood. "I think I
know what most of the rules are now. I'll try not to break any of them."

The days which followed brought a number of modifications of his prison
lot, but not sufficient by any means to make it acceptable to him.
Bonhag, during the first few days in which he trained Cowperwood in the
art of caning chairs, managed to make it perfectly clear that there were
a number of things he would be willing to do for him. One of the things
that moved him to this, was that already he had been impressed by the
fact that Stener's friends were coming to see him in larger numbers than
Cowperwood's, sending him an occasional basket of fruit, which he
gave to the overseers, and that his wife and children had been already
permitted to visit him outside the regular visiting-day. This was a
cause for jealousy on Bonhag's part. His fellow-overseer was lording it
over him--telling him, as it were, of the high jinks in Block 4.
Bonhag really wanted Cowperwood to spruce up and show what he could do,
socially or otherwise.

And so now he began with: "I see you have your lawyer and your partner
here every day. There ain't anybody else you'd like to have visit you,
is there? Of course, it's against the rules to have your wife or sister
or anybody like that, except on visiting days--" And here he paused
and rolled a large and informing eye on Cowperwood--such an eye as was
supposed to convey dark and mysterious things. "But all the rules ain't
kept around here by a long shot."

Cowperwood was not the man to lose a chance of this kind. He smiled a
little--enough to relieve himself, and to convey to Bonhag that he was
gratified by the information, but vocally he observed: "I'll tell you
how it is, Mr. Bonhag. I believe you understand my position better than
most men would, and that I can talk to you. There are people who would
like to come here, but I have been afraid to let them come. I did
not know that it could be arranged. If it could be, I would be very
grateful. You and I are practical men--I know that if any favors are
extended some of those who help to bring them about must be looked
after. If you can do anything to make it a little more comfortable for
me here I will show you that I appreciate it. I haven't any money on my
person, but I can always get it, and I will see that you are properly
looked after."

Bonhag's short, thick ears tingled. This was the kind of talk he liked
to hear. "I can fix anything like that, Mr. Cowperwood," he replied,
servilely. "You leave it to me. If there's any one you want to see at
any time, just let me know. Of course I have to be very careful, and so
do you, but that's all right, too. If you want to stay out in that yard
a little longer in the mornings or get out there afternoons or evenings,
from now on, why, go ahead. It's all right. I'll just leave the door
open. If the warden or anybody else should be around, I'll just scratch
on your door with my key, and you come in and shut it. If there's
anything you want from the outside I can get it for you--jelly or eggs
or butter or any little thing like that. You might like to fix up your
meals a little that way."

"I'm certainly most grateful, Mr. Bonhag," returned Cowperwood in his
grandest manner, and with a desire to smile, but he kept a straight
face.

"In regard to that other matter," went on Bonhag, referring to the
matter of extra visitors, "I can fix that any time you want to. I know
the men out at the gate. If you want anybody to come here, just write
'em a note and give it to me, and tell 'em to ask for me when they come.
That'll get 'em in all right. When they get here you can talk to 'em
in your cell. See! Only when I tap they have to come out. You want to
remember that. So just you let me know."

Cowperwood was exceedingly grateful. He said so in direct, choice
language. It occurred to him at once that this was Aileen's opportunity,
and that he could now notify her to come. If she veiled herself
sufficiently she would probably be safe enough. He decided to write her,
and when Wingate came he gave him a letter to mail.

Two days later, at three o'clock in the afternoon--the time appointed
by him--Aileen came to see him. She was dressed in gray broadcloth
with white-velvet trimmings and cut-steel buttons which glistened like
silver, and wore, as additional ornaments, as well as a protection
against the cold, a cap, stole, and muff of snow-white ermine. Over
this rather striking costume she had slipped a long dark circular cloak,
which she meant to lay off immediately upon her arrival. She had made
a very careful toilet as to her shoes, gloves, hair, and the gold
ornaments which she wore. Her face was concealed by a thick green veil,
as Cowperwood had suggested; and she arrived at an hour when, as near as
he had been able to prearrange, he would be alone. Wingate usually came
at four, after business, and Steger in the morning, when he came at all.
She was very nervous over this strange adventure, leaving the street-car
in which she had chosen to travel some distance away and walking up a
side street. The cold weather and the gray walls under a gray sky gave
her a sense of defeat, but she had worked very hard to look nice in
order to cheer her lover up. She knew how readily he responded to the
influence of her beauty when properly displayed.

Cowperwood, in view of her coming, had made his cell as acceptable as
possible. It was clean, because he had swept it himself and made his own
bed; and besides he had shaved and combed his hair, and otherwise put
himself to rights. The caned chairs on which he was working had been put
in the corner at the end of the bed. His few dishes were washed and
hung up, and his clogs brushed with a brush which he now kept for the
purpose. Never before, he thought to himself, with a peculiar feeling
of artistic degradation, had Aileen seen him like this. She had always
admired his good taste in clothes, and the way he carried himself in
them; and now she was to see him in garments which no dignity of body
could make presentable. Only a stoic sense of his own soul-dignity aided
him here. After all, as he now thought, he was Frank A. Cowperwood,
and that was something, whatever he wore. And Aileen knew it. Again,
he might be free and rich some day, and he knew that she believed that.
Best of all, his looks under these or any other circumstances, as he
knew, would make no difference to Aileen. She would only love him the
more. It was her ardent sympathy that he was afraid of. He was so glad
that Bonhag had suggested that she might enter the cell, for it would be
a grim procedure talking to her through a barred door.

When Aileen arrived she asked for Mr. Bonhag, and was permitted to go to
the central rotunda, where he was sent for. When he came she murmured:
"I wish to see Mr. Cowperwood, if you please"; and he exclaimed, "Oh,
yes, just come with me." As he came across the rotunda floor from his
corridor he was struck by the evident youth of Aileen, even though he
could not see her face. This now was something in accordance with
what he had expected of Cowperwood. A man who could steal five hundred
thousand dollars and set a whole city by the ears must have wonderful
adventures of all kinds, and Aileen looked like a true adventure. He led
her to the little room where he kept his desk and detained visitors, and
then bustled down to Cowperwood's cell, where the financier was working
on one of his chairs and scratching on the door with his key, called:
"There's a young lady here to see you. Do you want to let her come
inside?"

"Thank you, yes," replied Cowperwood; and Bonhag hurried away,
unintentionally forgetting, in his boorish incivility, to unlock the
cell door, so that he had to open it in Aileen's presence. The long
corridor, with its thick doors, mathematically spaced gratings and
gray-stone pavement, caused Aileen to feel faint at heart. A prison,
iron cells! And he was in one of them. It chilled her usually courageous
spirit. What a terrible place for her Frank to be! What a horrible thing
to have put him here! Judges, juries, courts, laws, jails seemed like so
many foaming ogres ranged about the world, glaring down upon her and
her love-affair. The clank of the key in the lock, and the heavy outward
swinging of the door, completed her sense of the untoward. And then she
saw Cowperwood.

Because of the price he was to receive, Bonhag, after admitting her,
strolled discreetly away. Aileen looked at Cowperwood from behind
her veil, afraid to speak until she was sure Bonhag had gone. And
Cowperwood, who was retaining his self-possession by an effort, signaled
her but with difficulty after a moment or two. "It's all right," he
said. "He's gone away." She lifted her veil, removed her cloak, and took
in, without seeming to, the stuffy, narrow thickness of the room, his
wretched shoes, the cheap, misshapen suit, the iron door behind him
leading out into the little yard attached to his cell. Against such a
background, with his partially caned chairs visible at the end of the
bed, he seemed unnatural, weird even. Her Frank! And in this condition.
She trembled and it was useless for her to try to speak. She could only
put her arms around him and stroke his head, murmuring: "My poor boy--my
darling. Is this what they have done to you? Oh, my poor darling." She
held his head while Cowperwood, anxious to retain his composure, winced
and trembled, too. Her love was so full--so genuine. It was so soothing
at the same time that it was unmanning, as now he could see, making of
him a child again. And for the first time in his life, some inexplicable
trick of chemistry--that chemistry of the body, of blind forces which so
readily supersedes reason at times--he lost his self-control. The
depth of Aileen's feelings, the cooing sound of her voice, the velvety
tenderness of her hands, that beauty that had drawn him all the
time--more radiant here perhaps within these hard walls, and in the
face of his physical misery, than it had ever been before--completely
unmanned him. He did not understand how it could; he tried to defy the
moods, but he could not. When she held his head close and caressed it,
of a sudden, in spite of himself, his breast felt thick and stuffy, and
his throat hurt him. He felt, for him, an astonishingly strange feeling,
a desire to cry, which he did his best to overcome; it shocked him so.
There then combined and conspired to defeat him a strange, rich picture
of the great world he had so recently lost, of the lovely, magnificent
world which he hoped some day to regain. He felt more poignantly at this
moment than ever he had before the degradation of the clog shoes, the
cotton shirt, the striped suit, the reputation of a convict, permanent
and not to be laid aside. He drew himself quickly away from her, turned
his back, clinched his hands, drew his muscles taut; but it was too
late. He was crying, and he could not stop.

"Oh, damn it!" he exclaimed, half angrily, half self-commiseratingly, in
combined rage and shame. "Why should I cry? What the devil's the matter
with me, anyhow?"

Aileen saw it. She fairly flung herself in front of him, seized his head
with one hand, his shabby waist with the other, and held him tight in a
grip that he could not have readily released.

"Oh, honey, honey, honey!" she exclaimed, pityingly feverishly. "I love
you, I adore you. They could cut my body into bits if it would do you
any good. To think that they should make you cry! Oh, my sweet, my
sweet, my darling boy!"

She pulled his still shaking body tighter, and with her free hand
caressed his head. She kissed his eyes, his hair, his cheeks. He pulled
himself loose again after a moment, exclaiming, "What the devil's got
into me?" but she drew him back.

"Never mind, honey darling, don't you be ashamed to cry. Cry here on my
shoulder. Cry here with me. My baby--my honey pet!"

He quieted down after a few moments, cautioning her against Bonhag, and
regaining his former composure, which he was so ashamed to have lost.

"You're a great girl, pet," he said, with a tender and yet apologetic
smile. "You're all right--all that I need--a great help to me; but don't
worry any longer about me, dear. I'm all right. It isn't as bad as you
think. How are you?"

Aileen on her part was not to be soothed so easily. His many woes,
including his wretched position here, outraged her sense of justice and
decency. To think her fine, wonderful Frank should be compelled to come
to this--to cry. She stroked his head, tenderly, while wild, deadly,
unreasoning opposition to life and chance and untoward opposition surged
in her brain. Her father--damn him! Her family--pooh! What did she
care? Her Frank--her Frank. How little all else mattered where he was
concerned. Never, never, never would she desert him--never--come what
might. And now she clung to him in silence while she fought in her
brain an awful battle with life and law and fate and circumstance.
Law--nonsense! People--they were brutes, devils, enemies, hounds! She
was delighted, eager, crazy to make a sacrifice of herself. She would go
anywhere for or with her Frank now. She would do anything for him.
Her family was nothing--life nothing, nothing, nothing. She would do
anything he wished, nothing more, nothing less; anything she could do to
save him, to make his life happier, but nothing for any one else.




